Although it is a cold evening, down by one of the fishhouses an old man sits netting, his net, in the gloaming almost invisible, a dark purple-brown, and his shuttle worn and polished. The air smells so strong of codfish it makes one's nose run and one's eyes water. The five fishhouses have steeply peaked roofs and narrow, cleated gangplanks slant up to storerooms in the gables for the wheelbarrows to be pushed up and down on. All is silver: the heavy surface of the sea, swelling slowly as if considering spilling over, is opaque, but the silver of the benches, the lobster pots, and masts, scattered among the wild jagged rocks, is of an apparent translucence like the small old buildings with an emerald moss growing on their shoreward walls. The big fish tubs are completely lined with layers of beautiful herring scales and the wheelbarrows are similarly plastered with creamy iridescent coats of mail, with small iridescent flies crawling on them. Up on the little slope behind the houses, set in the sparse bright sprinkle of grass, is an ancient wooden capstan, cracked, with two long bleached handles and some melancholy stains, like dried blood, where the ironwork has rusted. The old man accepts a Lucky Strike. He was a friend of my grandfather. We talk of the decline in the population and of codfish and herring while he waits for a herring boat to come in. There are sequins on his vest and on his thumb. He has scraped the scales, the principal beauty, from unnumbered fish with that black old knife, the blade of which is almost worn away. Down at the water's edge, at the place where they haul up the boats, up the long ramp descending into the water, thin silver tree trunks are laid horizontally across the gray stones, down and down at intervals of four or five feet. Cold dark deep and absolutely clear, element bearable to no mortal, to fish and to seals . . . One seal particularly I have seen here evening after evening. He was curious about me.  He was interested in music like me a believer in total immersion, so I used to sing him Baptist hymns. I also sang "A Mighty Fortress Is Our God." He stood up in the water and regarded me steadily, moving his head a little. Then he would disappear, then suddenly emerge almost in the same spot, with a sort of shrug as if it were against his better judgment. Cold dark deep and absolutely clear, the clear gray icy water . . . Back, behind us, the dignified tall firs begin. Bluish, associating with their shadows, a million Christmas trees stand waiting for Christmas.  The water seems suspended above the rounded gray and blue-gray stones. I have seen it over and over, the same sea, the same, slightly, indifferently swinging above the stones, icily free above the stones, above the stones and then the world. If you should dip your hand in, your wrist would ache immediately, your bones would begin to ache and your hand would burn as if the water were a transmutation of fire that feeds on stones and burns with a dark gray flame. If you tasted it, it would first taste bitter, then briny, then surely burn your tongue. It is like what we imagine knowledge to be: dark, salt, clear, moving, utterly free, drawn from the cold hard mouth of the world, derived from the rocky breasts forever, flowing and drawn, and since our knowledge is historical, flowing, and flown. This is the man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is the time of the tragic man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is a wristwatch telling the time of the talkative man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is a sailor wearing the watch that tells the time of the honored man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is the roadstead all of board reached by the sailor wearing the watch that tells the time of the old brave man that lies in the house of Bedlam. These are the years and the walls of the ward the winds and clouds of the sea of board sailed by the sailor wearing the watch that tells the time of the cranky man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is a Jew in a newspaper hat that dances weeping down the ward over the creaking sea of board beyond the sailor winding his watch that tells the time of the cruel man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is a world of books gone flat. This is a Jew in a newspaper hat that dances weeping down the ward over the creaking sea of board of the batty sailor that winds his watch that tells the time of the busy man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is a boy that pats the floor to see if the world is there is flat for the widowed Jew in the newspaper hat that dances weeping down the ward waltzing the length of a weaving board by the silent sailor that hears his watch that ticks the time of the tedious man that lies in the house of Bedlam. These are the years and the walls and the door that shut on a boy that pats the floor to feel if the world is there and flat. This is a Jew in a newspaper hat that dances joyfully down the ward into the parting seas of board past the staring sailor that shakes his watch that tells the time of the poet the man that lies in the house of Bedlam. This is the soldier home from the war. These are the years and the walls and the door that shut on a boy that pats the floorto see if the world is round or flat. This is a Jew in a newspaper hat that dances carefully down the ward walking the plank of a coffin board with the crazy sailor that shows his watch that tells the time of the wretched man that lies in the house of Bedlam. From Brooklyn, over the Brooklyn Bridge, on this fine morning, please come flying. In a cloud of fiery pale chemicals, please come flying, to the rapid rolling of thousands of small blue drums descending out of the mackerel sky over the glittering grandstand of harbor-water, please come flying. Whistles, pennants and smoke are blowing.  The ships are signaling cordially with multitudes of flags rising and falling like birds all over the harbor. Enter: two rivers, gracefully bearing countless little pellucid jellies in cut-glass epergnes dragging with silver chains. The flight is safe the weather is all arranged. The waves are running in verses this fine morning. Please come flying. Come with the pointed toe of each black shoe trailing a sapphire highlight, with a black capeful of butterfly wings and bon-mots, with heaven knows how many angels all riding on the broad black brim of your hat, please come flying. Bearing a musical inaudible abacus, a slight censorious frown, and blue ribbons, please come flying. Facts and skyscrapers glint in the tide Manhattan is all awash with morals this fine morning, so please come flying. Mounting the sky with natural heroism, above the accidents, above the malignant movies, the taxicabs and injustices at large, while horns are resounding in your beautiful ears that simultaneously listen to a soft uninvented music, fit for the musk deer, please come flying. For whom the grim museums will behave like courteous male bower-birds, for whom the agreeable lions lie in wait on the steps of the Public Library, eager to rise and follow through the doors up into the reading rooms, please come flying. We can sit down and weep we can go shopping, or play at a game of constantly being wrong with a priceless set of vocabularies, or we can bravely deplore, but please please come flying. With dynasties of negative constructions darkening and dying around you, with grammar that suddenly turns and shines like flocks of sandpipers flying, please come flying. Come like a light in the white mackerel sky, come like a daytime comet with a long unnebulous train of words, from Brooklyn, over the Brooklyn Bridge, on this fine morning, please come flying. I caught a tremendous fish and held him beside the boat half out of water, with my hook fast in a corner of his mouth. He didn't fight. He hadn't fought at all. He hung a grunting weight, battered and venerable and homely.  Here and there his brown skin hung in strips like ancient wallpaper, and its pattern of darker brown was like wallpaper: shapes like full-blown roses stained and lost through age. He was speckled with barnacles, fine rosettes of lime, and infested with tiny white sea-lice, and underneath two or three rags of green weed hung down. While his gills were breathing in the terrible oxygen --the frightening gills, fresh and crisp with blood, that can cut so badly-- I thought of the coarse white flesh packed in like feathers, the big bones and the little bones, the dramatic reds and blacks of his shiny entrails, and the pink swim-bladder like a big peony. I looked into his eyes which were far larger than mine but shallower, and yellowed, the irises backed and packed with tarnished tinfoil seen through the lenses of old scratched isinglass. They shifted a little, but not to return my stare. --It was more like the tipping of an object toward the light. I admired his sullen face, the mechanism of his jaw, and then I saw that from his lower lip --if you could call it a lip grim, wet, and weaponlike, hung five old pieces of fish-line, or four and a wire leader with the swivel still attached, with all their five big hooks grown firmly in his mouth. A green line, frayed at the end where he broke it, two heavier lines, and a fine black thread still crimped from the strain and snap when it broke and he got away. Like medals with their ribbons frayed and wavering, a five-haired beard of wisdom trailing from his aching jaw. I stared and stared and victory filled up the little rented boat, from the pool of bilge where oil had spread a rainbow around the rusted engine to the bailer rusted orange, the sun-cracked thwarts, the oarlocks on their strings, the gunnels--until everything was rainbow, rainbow, rainbow! And I let the fish go. for Louise crane In your next letter I wish you'd say where you are going and what you are doing how are the plays and after the plays what other pleasures you're pursuing: taking cabs in the middle of the night, driving as if to save your soul where the road gose round and round the park and the meter glares like a moral owl, and the trees look so queer and green standing alone in big black caves and suddenly you're in a different place where everything seems to happen in waves, and most of the jokes you just can't catch, like dirty words rubbed off a slate, and the songs are loud but somehow dim and it gets so teribly late, and coming out of the brownstone house to the gray sidewalk, the watered street, one side of the buildings rises with the sun like a glistening field of wheat. --Wheat, not oats, dear. I'm afraid if it's wheat it's none of your sowing, nevertheless I'd like to know what you are doing and where you are going. for Robert Lowell This is the time of year when almost every night the frail, illegal fire balloons appear. Climbing the mountain height, rising toward a saint still honored in these parts, the paper chambers flush and fill with light that comes and goes, like hearts. Once up against the sky it's hard to tell them from the stars-- planets, that is--the tinted ones: Venus going down, or Mars, or the pale green one.  With a wind, they flare and falter, wobble and toss but if it's still they steer between the kite sticks of the Southern Cross, receding, dwindling, solemnly and steadily forsaking us, or, in the downdraft from a peak, suddenly turning dangerous. Last night another big one fell. It splattered like an egg of fire against the cliff behind the house. The flame ran down.  We saw the pair of owls who nest there flying up and up, their whirling black-and-white stained bright pink underneath, until they shrieked up out of sight. The ancient owls' nest must have burned. Hastily, all alone, a glistening armadillo left the scene, rose-flecked, head down, tail down, and then a baby rabbit jumped out, short-eared, to our surprise. So soft!--a handful of intangible ash with fixed, ignited eyes. Too pretty, dreamlike mimicry! O falling fire and piercing cry and panic, and a weak mailed fist clenched ignorant against the sky! (In Memoriam: Robert Lowell) I can make out the rigging of a schooner a mile off I can count the new cones on the spruce. It is so still the pale bay wears a milky skin the sky no clouds except for one long, carded horses tail. The islands haven't shifted since last summer, even if I like to pretend they have --drifting, in a dreamy sort of way, a little north, a little south, or sidewise, and that they're free within the blue frontiers of bay. This month, our favorite one is full of flowers: Buttercups, Red Clover, Purple Vetch, Hackweed still burning, Daisies pied, Eyebright, the Fragrant Bedstraw's incandescent stars, and more, returned, to paint the meadows with delight. The Goldfinches are back, or others like them, and the White-throated Sparrow's five-note song, pleading and pleading, brings tears to the eyes. Nature repeats herself, or almost does: repeat, repeat, repeat revise, revise, revise. Years ago, you told me it was here (in ?) you first "discovered girls" and learned to sail, and learned to kiss. You had "such fun," you said, that classic summer. ("Fun"--it always seemed to leave you at a loss...) You left North Haven, anchored in its rock, afloat in mystic blue...And now--you've left for good. You can't derange, or re-arrange, your poems again. (But the Sparrows can their song.) The words won't change again. Sad friend, you cannot change. In Worcester, Massachusetts, I went with Aunt Consuelo to keep her dentist's appointment and sat and waited for her in the dentist's waiting room. It was winter.  It got dark early. The waiting room was full of grown-up people, arctics and overcoats, lamps and magazines. My aunt was inside what seemed like a long time and while I waited and read the National Geographic (I could read) and carefully studied the photographs: the inside of a volcano, black, and full of ashes then it was spilling over in rivulets of fire. Osa and Martin Johnson dressed in riding breeches, laced boots, and pith helmets. A dead man slung on a pole "Long Pig," the caption said. Babies with pointed heads wound round and round with string black, naked women with necks wound round and round with wire like the necks of light bulbs. Their breasts were horrifying. I read it right straight through. I was too shy to stop. And then I looked at the cover: the yellow margins, the date. Suddenly, from inside, came an oh! of pain --Aunt Consuelo's voice-- not very loud or long. I wasn't at all surprised even then I knew she was a foolish, timid woman. I might have been embarrassed, but wasn't.  What took me completely by surprise was that it was me: my voice, in my mouth. Without thinking at all I was my foolish aunt, I--we--were falling, falling, our eyes glued to the cover of the National Geographic, February, . I said to myself: three days and you'll be seven years old. I was saying it to stop the sensation of falling off the round, turning world. into cold, blue-black space. But I felt: you are an I, you are an Elizabeth, you are one of them. Why should you be one, too? I scarcely dared to look to see what it was I was. I gave a sidelong glance --I couldn't look any higher-- at shadowy gray knees, trousers and skirts and boots and different pairs of hands lying under the lamps. I knew that nothing stranger had ever happened, that nothing stranger could ever happen. Why should I be my aunt, or me, or anyone? What similarities boots, hands, the family voice I felt in my throat, or even the National Geographic and those awful hanging breasts held us all together or made us all just one? How I didn't know any word for it how "unlikely". . . How had I come to be here, like them, and overhear a cry of pain that could have got loud and worse but hadn't? The waiting room was bright and too hot.  It was sliding beneath a big black wave, another, and another. Then I was back in it. The War was on.  Outside, in Worcester, Massachusetts, were night and slush and cold, and it was still the fifth of February, . The art of losing isn't hard to master so many things seem filled with the intent to be lost that their loss is no disaster. Lose something every day. Accept the fluster of lost door keys the hour badly spent. The art of losing isn't hard to master. Then practice losing farther losing faster: places and names and where it was your meant to travel. None of these will bring disaster. I lost my mother's watch. And look! my last or next-to-last of three loved housed went. The art of losing isn't hard to master. I lose two cities lovely ones. And vaster some realms I owned two rivers a continent. I miss them but it wasn't a disaster. --Even losing you (the joking voice a gesture I love) I shan't have lied. It's evident the art of losing's not too hard to master though it may look like (Write it!) like disaster. There is unknown dust that is near us Waves breaking on shores just over the hill Trees full of birds that we have never seen Nets drawn with dark fish. The evening arrives we look up and it is there It has come through the nets of the stars Through the tissues of the grass Walking quietly over the asylums of the waters. The day shall never end we think: We have hair that seemed born for the daylight But at last the quiet waters of the night will rise And our skin shall see far off as it does under water. Inside the veins there are navies setting forth Tiny explosions at the water lines And seagulls weaving in the wind of the salty blood. It is the morning. The country has slept the whole winter. Window seats were covered with fur skins the yard was full Of stiff dogs and hands that clumsily held heavy books. Now we wake and rise from bed and eat breakfast!- Shouts rise from the harbor of the blood Mist and masts rising the knock of wooden tackle in the sunlight. Now we sing and do tiny dances on the kitchen floor. Our whole body is like a harbor at dawn We know that our master has left us for the day. Oh on an early morning I think I shall live forever! I am wrapped in my joyful flesh As the grass is wrapped in its clouds of green. Rising from a bed where I dreamt Of long rides past castles and hot coals The sun lies happily on my knees I have suffered and survived the night Bathed in dark water like any blade of grass. The strong leaves of the box-elder tree Plunging in the wind call us to disappear Into the wilds of the universe Where we shall sit at the foot of a plant And live forever like the dust. The grass is half-covered with snow. It was the sort of snowfall that starts in late afternoon And now the little houses of the grass are growing dark. If I reached my hands down near the earth I could take handfuls of darkness! A darkness was always there which we never noticed. As the snow grows heavier the cornstalks fade farther away And the barn moves nearer to the house. The barn moves all alone in the growing storm. The barn is full of corn and moves toward us now Like a hulk blown toward us in a storm at sea All the sailors on deck have been blind for many years. There has been a light snow. Dark car tracks move in out of the darkness. I stare at the train window marked with soft dust. I have awakened at Missoula Montana utterly happy. It is a cold and snowy night. The main street is deserted. The only things moving are swirls of snow. As I lift the mailbox door I feel its cold iron. There is a privacy I love in this snowy night. Driving around I will waste more time. How strange to think of giving up all ambition! Suddenly I see with such clear eyes The white flake of snow That has just fallen in the horse's mane! I start out for a walk at last after weeks at the desk. Moon gone plowing underfoot no stars not a trace of light! Suppose a horse were galloping toward me in this open field? Every day I did not spend in solitude was wasted. Let's count the bodies over again. If we could only make the bodies smaller The size of skulls We could make a whole plain white with skulls in the moonlight! If we could only make the bodies smaller Maybe we could get A whole year's kill in front of us on a desk! If we could only make the bodies smaller We could fit A body into a finger-ring for a keepsake forever. Conversation brings us so close! Opening The surfs of the body Bringing fish up near the sun And stiffening the backbones of the sea! I have wandered in a face for hours Passing through dark fires. I have risen to a body Not yet born Existing like a light around the body Through which the body moves like a sliding moon. Darkness is falling through darkness Falling from ledge To ledge. There is a man whose body is perfectly whole. He stands the storm behind him And the grass blades are leaping in the wind. Darkness is gathered in folds About his feet. He is no one. When we see Him we grow calm And sail on into the tunnels of joyful death. These insects golden And Arabic sailing in the husks of galleons Their octagonal heads also Hold sand paintings of the next life. Grass high under apple trees. The bark of the trees rough and sexual the grass growing heavy and uneven. We cannot bear disaster like the rocks- swaying nakedly in open fields. One slight bruise and we die! I know no one on this train. A man comes walking down the aisle. I want to tell him that I forgive him that I want him to forgive me. As I drive my parents home through the snow their frailty hesitates on the edge of a mountainside. I call over the cliff only snow answers. They talk quietly of hauling water of eating an orange of a grandchild's photograph left behind last night. When they open the door of their house they disappear. And the oak when it falls in the forest who hears it through miles and miles of silence? They sit so close to each other´as if pressed together by the snow. Ten Years Old Nigh and day arrive and day after day goes by And what is old remains old and what is young remains young and grows old. The lumber pile does not grow younger nor the two-by-fours lose their darkness but the old tree goes on the barn stands without help so many years the advocate of darkness and night is not lost. The horse steps up swings on one leg turns its body the chicken flapping claws onto the roost its wings whelping and walloping but what is primitive is not to be shot out into the night and the dark. And slowly the kind man comes closer loses his rage sits down at table. So I am proud only of those days that pass in undivided tenderness when you sit drawing or making books stapled with messages to the world or coloring a man with fire coming out of his hair. Or we sit at a table with small tea carefully poured. So we pass our time together calm and delighted. All day I loved you in a fever holding on to the tail of the horse. I overflowed whenever I reached out to touch you. My hand moved over your body covered With its dress Burning rough an animal's hand or foot moving over leaves. The rainstorm retires clouds open sunlight sliding over ocean water a thousand miles from land. In rainy September when leaves grow down to the dark I put my forehead down to the damp seaweed-smelling sand. What can we do but choose? The only way for human beings is to choose. The fern has no choice but to live for this crime it receives earth water and night. we close the door. "I have no claim on you." Dusk comes. "The love I have had with you is enough." We know we could live apart from the flock. The sheldrake floats apart from the flock. The oaktree puts out leaves alone on the lonely hillside. Men and women before us have accomplished this. I would see you and you me once a year. We would be two kernels and not be planted. We stay in the room door closed lights out. I weep with you without shame and without honor. About a year has passed. I've returned to the place of the battle to its birds that have learned their unfolding of wings from a subtle lift of a surprised eyebrow or perhaps from a razor blade - wings now the shade of early twilight now of state bad blood. Now the place is abuzz with trading in your ankles's remanants bronzes of sunburnt breastplates dying laughter bruises rumors of fresh reserves memories of high treason laundered banners with imprints of the many who since have risen. All's overgrown with people. A ruin's a rather stubborn architectural style. And the hearts's distinction from a pitch-black cavern isn't that great not great enough to fear that we may collide again like blind eggs somewhere. At sunrise when nobody stares at one's face I often set out on foot to a monument cast in molten lengthy bad dreams. And it says on the plinth commander in chief. But it reads in grief  or in brief  or in going under. translated by the author. It's not that the Muse feels like clamming up it's more like high time for the lad's last nap. And the scarf-waving lass who wished him the best drives a steamroller across his chest. And the words won't rise either like that rod or like logs to rejoin their old grove's sweet rot and like eggs in the frying pan the face spills its eyes all over the pillowcase. Are you warm tonight under those six veils in that basin of yours whose strung bottom wails where like fish that gasp at the foreign blue my raw lip was catching what then was you? I would have hare's ears sewn to my bald head in thick woods for your sake I'd gulp drops of lead and from black gnarled snags in the oil-smooth poad I'd bob up to your face as some Tirpitz won't. But it's not on the cards or the waiter's tray and it pains to say where one's hair turns gray. There are more blue veins than the blood to swell their dried web let alone some remote brain cell We are parting for good my friend that's that. Draw an empty circle on your blue pad. This will be me: no insides in thrall. Stare at it a while then erase the scrawl. Translated by the author. I have braved for want of wild beasts steel cages carved my term and nickname on bunks and rafters lived by the sea flashed aces in an oasis dined with the-devil-knows-whom in tails on truffles. From the height of a glacier I beheld half a world the earthly width. Twice have drowned thrice let knives rake my nitty-gritty. Quit the country the bore and nursed me. Those who forgot me would make a city. I have waded the steppes that saw yelling Huns in saddles worn the clothes nowadays back in fashion in every quarter planted rye tarred the roofs of pigsties and stables guzzled everything save dry water. I've admitted the sentries' third eye into my wetand foul dreams. Munched the bread of exile it's stale and warty. Granted my lungs all sounds except the howl switched to a whisper. Now I am forty. What should I say about my life? That it's long and abhors transparence. Broken eggs make me grieve the omelette though makes me vomit. Yet until brown clay has been rammed down my larynx only gratitude will be gushing from it. translated by the author. All the huskies are eaten. There is no space left in the diary And the beads of quick words scatter over his spouse's sepia-shaded face adding the date in question like a mole to her lovely cheek. Next the snapshot of his sister. He doesn't spare his kin: what's been reached is the highest possible latitude! And like the silk stocking of a burlesque half-nude queen it climbs up his thigh: gangrene. translated by the author. A hotel in whose ledgers departures are more prominent than arrivals. With wet Koh-i-noors the October rain strokes what's left of the naked brain. In this country laid flat for the sake of rivers, beer smells of Germany and the seaguls are in the air like a page's soiled corners. Morning enters the premises with a coroner's punctuality, puts its ear to the ribs of a cold radiator, detects sub-zero: the afterlife has to start somewhere. Correspondingly, the angelic curls grow more blond, the skin gains its distant, lordly white, while the bedding already coils desperately in the basement laundry. The perilous blue sun follows with its slant eyes masts of the shuddered grove steaming up to capsize in the frozen straits of Epiphany. February has fewer days than the other months therefore it's morecruel than the rest. Dearest it's more sound to wrap up our sailing round the globe with habitual naval grace moving your cot to the fireplace where our dreadnought is going under in great smoke. Only fire can grasp a winter! Golder unharnessed stallions in the chimney dye their manes to more corvine shades as they near the finish and the dark room fills with the plaintive incessant chirring of a naked lounging grasshopper one cannot cup in fingers. translated by the author. Citizen enemy mama's boy sucker utter garbage panhandler swine refujew verrucht a scalp so often scalded with boiling water that the puny brain feels completely cooked. Yes we have dwelt here: in this concrete brick wooden rubble which you now arrive to sift. All our wires were crossed barbed tangled or interwoven. Also: we didn't love our women but they conceived. Sharp is the sound of pickax that hurts dead iron still it's gentler that what we've been told or have said ourselves. Stranger! move carefully through our carrion: what seems carrion to you is freedom to our cells Leave our names alone. Don't reconstruct those vowels consonants and so forth: they won't resemble larks but a demented bloodhound whose maw devours its own traces feces and barks and barks. translated by the author. The stone-built villages of England. A cathedral bottled in a pub window. Cows dispersed across fields. Monuments to kings. A man in a moth-eaten suit sees a train off heading like everything here for the sea smiles at his daughter leaving for the East. A whistle blows. And the endless sky over the tiles grows bluer as swelling birdsong fills. And the clearer the song is heard the smaller the bird. - translated by the author. Darling you think it's love it's just a midnightjourney. Best are the dales and rivers removed by force as from the next compartment throttles Oh stopit Bernie  yet the rhythm of those paroxysms is exactly yours. Hook to the meat! Brush to the red-brick dentures alias cigars smokeless like a driven nail! Here the works are fewer than monkey wrenches and the phones are whining dwarfed by to-no-avail. Bark then with joy at Clancy Fitzgibbon Miller. Dogs and block letters care how misfortune spells. Still you can tell yourself in the john by the spat-at mirror slamming the flush and emerging with clean lapels. Only the liquid furniture cradles the dwindling figure. Man shouldn't grow in size once he's been portrayed. Look: what's been left behind is about as meager as what remains ahead. Hence the horizon's blade. translated by the author. I was but what you'd brush with your palm what your leaning brow would hunch to in evening's raven-black hush. I was but what your gaze in that dark could distinguish: a dim shape to begin with later - features a face. It was you on my right on my left with your heated sighs who molded my helix whispering at my side. It was you by that black window's trembling tulle pattern who laid in my raw cavern a voice calling you back. I was practically blind. You appearing then hiding gave me my sight and heightened it. Thus some leave behind a trace. Thus they make worlds. Thus having done so at random wastefully they abandon their work to its whirls. Thus prey to speeds of light heat cold or darkness a sphere in space without markers spins and spins. translated by Paul Graves. Here's a girl from a dangerous town She crops her dark hair short so that less of her has to frown when someine gets hurt. She folds her memories like a parachute. Dropped she collects the peat and cooks her veggies at home: they shoot here where they eat. Ah there's more sky in these parts than say ground. Hence her voice's pitch and her stare stains your retina like a gray bulb when you switch hemispheres and her knee-length quilt skirt's cut to catch the squal I dream of her either loved or killed because the town's too small. translated by the author To I.K. Everything has its limit including sorrow. A windowpane stalls a stare. Nor does a grill abandon a leaf. One may rattle the keys gurgle down a swallow. Loneless cubes a man at random. A camel sniffs at the rail with a resentful nostril a perspective cuts emptiness deep and even. And what is space anyway if not the body's absence at every given point? That's why Urania's older sister Clio! in daylight or with the soot-rich lantern you see the globe's pate free of any bio you see she hides nothing unlike the latter. There they are blueberry-laden forests rivers where the folk with bare hands catch sturgeon or the towns in whose soggy phone books you are starring no longer father eastward surge on brown mountain ranges wild mares carousing in tall sedge the cheeckbones get blueer as they turn numerous. And still farther east steam dreadnoughts or cruisers and the expanse grows blue like lace underwear. translated by the author A list of some observation. In a corner it's warm. A glance leaves an imprint on anything it's dwelt on. Water is glass's most public form. Man is more frightening than its skeleton. A nowhere winter evening with wine. A black porch resists an osier's stiff assaults. Fixed on an elbow the body bulks like a glacier's debris a moraine of sorts. A millennium hence they'll no doubt expose a fossil bivalve propped behind this gauze cloth with the print of lips under the print of fringe mumbling Good night to a window hinge. translated by the author TO HIM who in the love of Nature holds Communion with her visible forms she speaks A various language for his gayer hours She has a voice of gladness and a smile And eloquence of beauty and she glides Into his darker musings with a mild And healing sympathy that steals away Their sharpness ere he is aware. When thoughts Of the last bitter hour come like a blight Over thy spirit and sad images Of the stern agony and shroud and pall And breathless darkness and the narrow house Make thee to shudder and grow sick at heart！ Go forth under the open sky and list To Nature's teachings while from all around！ Earth and her waters and the depths of air！ Comes a still voice！Yet a few days and thee The all-beholding sun shall see no more In all his course nor yet in the cold ground Where thy pale form was laid with many tears Nor in the embrace of ocean shall exist Thy image. Earth that nourished thee shall claim Thy growth to be resolved to earth again And lost each human trace surrendering up Thine individual being shalt thou go To mix forever with the elements To be a brother to the insensible rock And to the sluggish clod which the rude swain Turns with his share and treads upon. The oak Shall send his roots abroad and pierce thy mould. Yet not to thine eternal resting-place Shalt thou retire alone nor couldst thou wish Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down With patriarchs of the infant world ！with kings The powerful of the earth ！the wise the good Fair forms and hoary seers of ages past All in one mighty sepulchre. The hills Rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun the vales Stretching in pensive quietness between The venerable woods！rivers that move In majesty and the complaining brooks That make the meadows green and poured round all Old Ocean's gray and melancholy waste ！ Are but the solemn decorations all Of the great tomb of man! The golden sun The planets all the infinite host of heaven Are shining on the sad abodes of death Through the still lapse of ages. All that tread The globe are but a handful to the tribes That slumber in its bosom.！Take the wings Of morning pierce the Barcan wilderness Or lose thyself in the continuous woods Where rolls the Oregon and hears no sound Save his own dashings ！yet the dead are there: And millions in those solitudes since first The flight of years began have laid them down In their last sleep！the dead reign there alone. So shalt thou rest and what if thou withdraw In silence from the living and no friend Take note of thy departure? All that breathe Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh When thou art gone the solemn brood of care Plod on and each one as before will chase His favorite phantom yet all these shall leave Their mirth and their employments and shall come And make their bed with thee. As the long train Of ages glide away the sons of men The youth in life's green spring and he who goes In the full strength of years matron and maid The speechless babe and the gray-headed man！ Shall one by one be gathered to thy side By those who in their turn shall follow them. So live that when thy summons comes to join The innumerable caravan which moves To that mysterious realm where each shall take His chamber in the silent halls of death Thou go not like the quarry-slave at night Scourged to his dungeon but sustained and soothed By an unfaltering trust approach thy grave Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch About him and lies down to pleasant dreams. WHITHER midst falling dew While glow the heavens with the last steps of day Far through their rosy depths dost thou pursue Thy solitary way? Vainly the fowler's eye Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong As darkly seen against the crimson sky Thy figure floats along. Seek'st thou the plashy brink Of weedy lake or marge of river wide Or where the rocking billows rise and sink On the chafed ocean-side? There is a Power whose care Teaches thy way along that pathless coast！ The desert and illimitable air！ Lone wandering but not lost. All day thy wings have fanned At that far height the cold thin atmosphere Yet stoop not weary to the welcome land Though the dark night is near. And soon that toil shall end Soon shalt thou find a summer home and rest And scream among thy fellows reeds shall bend Soon o'er thy sheltered nest. Thou 'rt gone the abyss of heaven Hath swallowed up thy form yet on my heart Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given And shall not soon depart. He who from zone to zone Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight In the long way that I must tread alone Will lead my steps aright. THE GROVES were God's first temples. Ere man learned To hew the shaft and lay the architrave And spread the roof above them！ere he framed The lofty vault to gather and roll back The sound of anthems in the darkling wood Amidst the cool and silence he knelt down And offered to the Mightiest solemn thanks And supplication. For his simple heart Might not resist the sacred influences Which from the stilly twilight of the place And from the gray old trunks that high in heaven Mingled their mossy boughs and from the sound Of the invisible breath that swayed at once All their green tops stole over him and bowed His spirit with the thought of boundless power And inaccessible majesty. Ah why Should we in the world's riper years neglect God's ancient sanctuaries and adore Only among the crowd and under roofs That our frail hands have raised? Let me at least Here in the shadow of this aged wood Offer one hymn！thrice happy if it find Acceptance in His ear. Father thy hand Hath reared these venerable columns thou Didst weave this verdant roof. Thou didst look down Upon the naked earth and forthwith rose All these fair ranks of trees. They in thy sun Budded and shook their green leaves in thy breeze And shot towards heaven. The century-living crow Whose birth was in their tops grew old and died Among their branches till at last they stood As now they stand massy and tall and dark Fit shrine for humble worshipper to hold Communion with his Maker. These dim vaults These winding aisles of human pomp or pride Report not. No fantastic carvings show The boast of our vain race to change the form Of thy fair works. But thou art here！thou fill'st The solitude. Thou art in the soft winds That run along the summit of these trees In music thou art in the cooler breath That from the inmost darkness of the place Comes scarcely felt the barky trunks the ground The fresh moist ground are all instinct with thee. Here is continual worship！Nature here In the tranquillity that thou dost love Enjoys thy presence. Noiselessly around From perch to perch the solitary bird Passes and yon clear spring that midst its herbs Wells softly forth and wandering steeps the roots Of half the mighty forest tells no tale Of all the good it does. Thou hast not left Thyself without a witness in these shades Of thy perfections. Grandeur strength and grace Are here to speak of thee. This mighty oak ！ By whose immovable stem I stand and seem Almost annihilated！not a prince In all that proud old world beyond the deep E'er wore his crown as loftily as he Wears the green coronal of leaves with which Thy hand has graced him. Nestled at his root Is beauty such as blooms not in the glare Of the broad sun. That delicate forest flower With scented breath and look so like a smile Seems as it issues from the shapeless mould An emanation of the indwelling Life A visible token of the upholding Love That are the soul of this great universe. My heart is awed within me when I think Of the great miracle that still goes on In silence round me！the perpetual work Of thy creation finished yet renewed Forever. Written on thy works I read The lesson of thy own eternity. Lo! all grow old and die！but see again How on the faltering footsteps of decay Youth presses ！ever-gay and beautiful youth In all its beautiful forms. These lofty trees Wave not less proudly that their ancestors Moulder beneath them. O there is not lost One of earth's charms: upon her bosom yet After the flight of untold centuries The freshness of her far beginning lies And yet shall lie. Life mocks the idle hate Of his arch-enemy Death！yea seats himself Upon the tyrant's throne！the sepulchre And of the triumphs of his ghastly foe Makes his own nourishment. For he came forth From thine own bosom and shall have no end. There have been holy men who hid themselves Deep in the woody wilderness and gave Their lives to thought and prayer till they outlived The generation born with them nor seemed Less aged than the hoary trees and rocks Around them！and there have been holy men Who deemed it were not well to pass life thus. But let me often to these solitudes Retire and in thy presence reassure My feeble virtue. Here its enemies The passions at thy plainer footsteps shrink And tremble and are still. O God! when thou Dost scare the world with tempests set on fire The heavens with falling thunderbolts or fill With all the waters of the firmament The swift dark whirlwind that uproots the woods And drowns the villages when at thy call Uprises the great deep and throws himself Upon the continent and overwhelms Its cities！who forgets not at the sight Of these tremendous tokens of thy power His pride and lays his strifes and follies by? O from these sterner aspects of thy face Spare me and mine nor let us need the wrath Of the mad unchain┬d elements to teach Who rules them. Be it ours to meditate In these calm shades thy milder majesty And to the beautiful order of thy works Learn to conform the order of our lives. I GAZED upon the glorious sky And the green mountains round And thought that when I came to lie At rest within the ground 'T were pleasant that in flowery June When brooks send up a cheerful tune And groves a joyous sound The sexton's hand my grave to make The rich green mountain-turf should break. A cell within the frozen mould A coffin borne through sleet And icy clods above it rolled While fierce the tempests beat！ Away!！I will not think of these！ Blue be the sky and soft the breeze Earth green beneath the feet And be the damp mould gently pressed Into my narrow place of rest. There through the long long summer hours The golden light should lie And thick young herbs and groups of flowers Stand in their beauty by. The oriole should build and tell His love-tale close beside my cell The idle butterfly Should rest him there and there be heard The housewife bee and humming-bird. And what if cheerful shouts at noon Come from the village sent Or song of maids beneath the moon With fairy laughter blent? And what if in the evening light Betroth┬d lovers walk in sight Of my low monument? I would the lovely scene around Might know no sadder sight nor sound. I know that I no more should see The season's glorious show Nor would its brightness shine for me Nor its wild music flow But if around my place of sleep The friends I love should come to weep They might not haste to go. Soft airs and song and light and bloom Should keep them lingering by my tomb. These to their softened hearts should bear The thought of what has been And speak of one who cannot share The gladness of the scene Whose part in all the pomp that fills The circuit of the summer hills Is that his grave is green And deeply would their hearts rejoice To hear again his living voice. THE MELANCHOLY days have come the saddest of the year Of wailing winds and naked woods and meadows brown and sere Heaped in the hollows of the grove the autumn leaves lie dead They rustle to the eddying gust and to the rabbit's tread The robin and the wren are flown and from the shrubs the jay And from the wood-top calls the crow through all the gloomy day. Where are the flowers the fair young flowers that lately sprang and stood In brighter light and softer airs a beauteous sisterhood? Alas! they all are in their graves the gentle race of flowers Are lying in their lowly beds with the fair and good of ours. The rain is falling where they lie but the cold November rain Calls not from out the gloomy earth the lovely ones again. The wind-flower and the violet they perished long ago And the brier-rose and the orchis died amid the summer glow But on the hill the goldenrod and the aster in the wood And the blue sunflower by the brook in autumn beauty stood Till fell the frost from the clear cold heaven as falls the plague on men And the brightness of their smile was gone from upland glade and glen. And now when comes the calm mild day as still such days will come To call the squirrel and the bee from out their winter home When the sound of dropping nuts is heard though all the trees are still And twinkle in the smoky light the waters of the rill The south wind searches for the flowers whose fragrance late he bore And sighs to find them in the wood and by the stream no more. And then I think of one who in her youthful beauty died The fair meek blossom that grew up and faded by my side. In the cold moist earth we laid her when the forests cast the leaf And we wept that one so lovely should have a life so brief: Yet not unmeet it was that one like that young friend of ours So gentle and so beautiful should perish with the flowers. THOU unrelenting Past! Strong are the barriers round thy dark domain And fetters sure and fast Hold all that enter thy unbreathing reign. Far in thy realm withdrawn Old empires sit in sullenness and gloom And glorious ages gone Lie deep within the shadow of thy womb. Childhood with all its mirth Youth Manhood Age that draws us to the ground And last Man's Life on earth Glide to thy dim dominions and are bound. Thou hast my better years Thou hast my earlier friends the good the kind Yielded to thee with tears！ The venerable form the exalted mind. My spirit yearns to bring The lost ones back！yearns with desire intense And struggles hard to wring Thy bolts apart and pluck thy captives thence. In vain thy gates deny All passage save to those who hence depart Nor to the streaming eye Thou giv'st them back！nor to the broken heart. In thy abysses hide Beauty and excellence unknown to thee Earth's wonder and her pride Are gathered as the waters to the sea Labors of good to man Unpublished charity unbroken faith Love that midst grief began And grew with years and faltered not in death. Full many a mighty name Lurks in thy depths unuttered unrevered With thee are silent fame Forgotten arts and wisdom disappeared. Thine for a space are they！ Yet shalt thou yield thy treasures up at last: Thy gates shall yet give way Thy bolts shall fall inexorable Past! All that of good and fair Has gone into thy womb from earliest time Shall then come forth to wear The glory and the beauty of its prime. They have not perished！no! Kind words remembered voices once so sweet Smiles radiant long ago And features the great soul's apparent seat. All shall come back each tie Of pure affection shall be knit again Alone shall Evil die And Sorrow dwell a prisoner in thy reign. And then shall I behold Him by whose kind paternal side I sprung And her who still and cold Fills the next grave！the beautiful and young. OUR band is few but true and tried Our leader frank and bold The British soldier trembles When Marion's name is told. Our fortress is the good greenwood Our tent the cypress-tree We know the forest round us As seamen know the sea. We know its walls of thorny vines Its glades of reedy grass Its safe and silent islands Within the dark morass. Woe to the English soldiery That little dread us near! On them shall light at midnight A strange and sudden fear: When waking to their tents on fire They grasp their arms in vain And they who stand to face us Are beat to earth again And they who fly in terror deem A mighty host behind And hear the tramp of thousands Upon the hollow wind. Then sweet the hour that brings release From danger and from toil We talk the battle over And share the battle's spoil. The woodland rings with laugh and shout As if a hunt were up And woodland flowers are gathered To crown the soldier's cup. With merry songs we mock the wind That in the pine-top grieves And slumber long and sweetly On beds of oaken leaves. Well knows the fair and friendly moon The band that Marion leads！ The glitter of their rifles The scampering of their steeds. 'T is life to guide the fiery barb Across the moonlit plain 'T is life to feel the night-wind That lifts his tossing mane. A moment in the British camp！ A moment！and away Back to the pathless forest Before the peep of day. Grave men there are by broad Santee Grave men with hoary hairs Their hearts are all with Marion For Marion are their prayers. And lovely ladies greet our band With kindliest welcoming With smiles like those of summer And tears like those of spring. For them we wear these trusty arms And lay them down no more Till we have driven the Briton Forever from our shore. ONCE this soft turf, this rivulet's sands, Were trampled by a hurrying crowd, And fiery hearts and arm┬d hands Encountered in the battle-cloud. Ah! never shall the land forget How gushed the life-blood of her brave！ Gushed, warm with hope and courage yet, Upon the soil they fought to save. Now all is calm, and fresh, and still Alone the chirp of flitting bird, And talk of children on the hill, And bell of wandering kine, are heard. No solemn host goes trailing by The black-mouthed gun and staggering wain Men start not at the battle-cry,！ O, be it never heard again! Soon rested those who fought but thou Who minglest in the harder strife For truths which men receive not now, Thy warfare only ends with life. A friendless warfare! lingering long Through weary day and weary year A wild and many-weaponed throng Hang on thy front, and flank, and rear. Yet nerve thy spirit to the proof, And blench not at thy chosen lot, The timid good may stand aloof, The sage may frown！yet faint thou not. Nor heed the shaft too surely cast, The foul and hissing bolt of scorn For with thy side shall dwell, at last, The victory of endurance born. Truth, crushed to earth, shall rise again The eternal years of God are hers But Error, wounded, writhes in pain, And dies among his worshippers. Yea, though thou lie upon the dust, When they who helped thee flee in fear, Die full of hope and manly trust, Like those who fell in battle here. Another hand thy sword shall wield, Another hand the standard wave, Till from the trumpet's mouth is pealed The blast of triumph o'er thy grave. HOW shall I know thee in the sphere which keeps The disembodied spirits of the dead When all of thee that time could wither sleeps And perishes among the dust we tread? For I shall feel the sting of ceaseless pain If there I meet thy gentle presence not Nor hear the voice I love nor read again In thy serenest eyes the tender thought. Will not thy own meek heart demand me there? That heart whose fondest throbs to me were given！ My name on earth was ever in thy prayer And wilt thou never utter it in heaven? In meadows fanned by heaven's life-breathing wind In the resplendence of that glorious sphere And larger movements of the unfettered mind Wilt thou forget the love that joined us here? The love that lived through all the stormy past And meekly with my harsher nature bore And deeper grew and tenderer to the last Shall it expire with life and be no more? A happier lot than mine and larger light Await thee there for thou hast bowed thy will In cheerful homage to the rule of right And lovest all and renderest good for ill. For me the sordid cares in which I dwell Shrink and consume my heart as heat the scroll And wrath has left its scar！that fire of hell Has left its frightful scar upon my soul. Yet though thou wear'st the glory of the sky Wilt thou not keep the same belov┬d name The same fair thoughtful brow and gentle eye Lovelier in heaven's sweet climate yet the same? Shalt thou not teach me in that calmer home The wisdom that I learned so ill in this！ The wisdom which is love！till I become Thy fit companion in that land of bliss? LET me move slowly through the street Filled with an ever-shifting train Amid the sound of steps that beat The murmuring walks like autumn rain. How fast the flitting figures come! The mild the fierce the stony face Some bright with thoughtless smiles and some Where secret tears have left their trace. They pass！to toil to strife to rest To halls in which the feast is spread To chambers where the funeral guest In silence sits beside the dead. And some to happy homes repair Where children pressing cheek to cheek With mute caresses shall declare The tenderness they cannot speak. And some who walk in calmness here Shall shudder as they reach the door Where one who made their dwelling dear Its flower its light is seen no more. Youth with pale cheek and slender frame And dreams of greatness in thine eye! Go'st thou to build an early name Or early in the task to die? Keen son of trade with eager brow! Who is now fluttering in thy snare? Thy golden fortunes tower they now Or melt the glittering spires in air? Who of this crowd to-night shall tread The dance till daylight gleam again? Who sorrow o'er the untimely dead? Who writhe in throes of mortal pain? Some famine-struck shall think how long The cold dark hours how slow the light And some who flaunt amid the throng Shall hide in dens of shame to-night. Each where his tasks or pleasures call They pass and heed each other not. There is who heeds who holds them all In His large love and boundless thought. These struggling tides of life that seem In wayward aimless course to tend Are eddies of the mighty stream That rolls to its appointed end. OH mother of a mighty race Yet lovely in thy youthful grace! The elder dames thy haughty peers Admire and hate thy blooming years. With words of shame And taunts of scorn they join thy name. For on thy cheeks the glow is spread That tints thy morning hills with red Thy step！the wild deer's rustling feet Within thy woods are not more fleet Thy hopeful eye Is bright as thine own sunny sky. Ay let them rail！those haughty ones While safe thou dwellest with thy sons. They do not know how loved thou art How many a fond and fearless heart Would rise to throw Its life between thee and the foe. They know not in their hate and pride What virtues with thy children bide How true how good thy graceful maids Make bright like flowers the valley-shades What generous men Spring like thine oaks by hill and glen. What cordial welcomes greet the guest By thy lone rivers of the West How faith is kept and truth revered And man is loved and God is feared In woodland homes And where the ocean-border foams. There 's freedom at thy gates and rest For Earth's down-trodden and opprest A shelter for the hunted head For the starved laborer toil and bread. Power at thy bounds Stops and calls back his baffled hounds. Oh fair young mother! on thy brow Shall sit a nobler grace than now. Deep in the brightness of the skies The thronging years in glory rise And as they fleet Drop strength and riches at thy feet. Thine eye with every coming hour Shall brighten and thy form shall tower And when thy sisters elder born Would brand thy name with words of scorn Before thine eye Upon their lips the taunt shall die. WITHIN this lowly grave a Conqueror lies And yet the monument proclaims it not Nor round the sleeper's name hath chisel wrought The emblems of a fame that never dies ！ Ivy and amaranth in a graceful sheaf Twined with the laurel's fair imperial leaf. A simple name alone To the great world unknown Is graven here and wild-flowers rising round Meek meadow-sweet and violets of the ground Lean lovingly against the humble stone. Here in the quiet earth they laid apart No man of iron mould and bloody hands Who sought to wreak upon the cowering lands The passions that consumed his restless heart But one of tender spirit and delicate frame Gentlest in mien and mind Of gentle womankind Timidly shrinking from the breath of blame: One in whose eyes the smile of kindness made Its haunt like flowers by sunny brooks in May Yet at the thought of others' pain a shade Of sweeter sadness chased the smile away. Nor deem that when the hand that moulders here Was raised in menace realms were chilled with fear And armies mustered at the sign as when Clouds rise on clouds before the rainy East！ Gray captains leading bands of veteran men And fiery youths to be the vulture's feast. Not thus were waged the mighty wars that gave The victory to her who fills this grave Alone her task was wrought Alone the battle fought Through that long strife her constant hope was staid On God alone nor looked for other aid. She met the hosts of Sorrow with a look That altered not beneath the frown they wore And soon the lowering brood were tamed and took Meekly her gentle rule and frowned no more. Her soft hand put aside the assaults of wrath And calmly broke in twain The fiery shafts of pain And rent the nets of passion from her path. By that victorious hand despair was slain. With love she vanquished hate and overcame Evil with good in her Great Master's name. Her glory is not of this shadowy state Glory that with the fleeting season dies But when she entered at the sapphire gate What joy was radiant in celestial eyes! How heaven's bright depths with sounding welcomes rung And flowers of heaven by shining hands were flung! And He who long before Pain scorn and sorrow bore The Mighty Sufferer with aspect sweet Smiled on the timid stranger from his seat He who returning glorious from the grave Dragged Death disarmed in chains a crouching slave. See as I linger here the sun grows low Cool airs are murmuring that the night is near. O gentle sleeper from thy grave I go Consoled though sad in hope and yet in fear. Brief is the time I know The warfare scarce begun Yet all may win the triumphs thou hast won. Still flows the fount whose waters strengthened thee The victors' names are yet too few to fill Heaven's mighty roll the glorious armory That ministered to thee is open still. COME let us plant the apple-tree. Cleave the tough greensward with the spade Wide let its hollow bed be made There gently lay the roots and there Sift the dark mould with kindly care And press it o'er them tenderly As round the sleeping infant's feet We softly fold the cradle sheet So plant we the apple-tree. What plant we in this apple-tree? Buds which the breath of summer days Shall lengthen into leafy sprays Boughs where the thrush with crimson breast Shall haunt and sing and hide her nest We plant upon the sunny lea A shadow for the noontide hour A shelter from the summer shower When we plant the apple-tree. What plant we in this apple-tree? Sweets for a hundred flowery springs To load the May-wind's restless wings When from the orchard row he pours Its fragrance through our open doors A world of blossoms for the bee Flowers for the sick girl's silent room For the glad infant sprigs of bloom We plant with the apple-tree. What plant we in this apple-tree! Fruits that shall swell in sunny June And redden in the August noon And drop when gentle airs come by That fan the blue September sky While children come with cries of glee And seek them where the fragrant grass Betrays their bed to those who pass At the foot of the apple-tree. And when above this apple-tree The winter stars are quivering bright And winds go howling through the night Girls whose young eyes o'erflow with mirth Shall peel its fruit by cottage-hearth And guests in prouder homes shall see Heaped with the grape of Cintra's vine And golden orange of the line The fruit of the apple-tree. The fruitage of this apple-tree Winds and our flag of stripe and star Shall bear to coasts that lie afar Where men shall wonder at the view And ask in what fair groves they grew And sojourners beyond the sea Shall think of childhood's careless day And long long hours of summer play In the shade of the apple-tree. Each year shall give this apple-tree A broader flush of roseate bloom A deeper maze of verdurous gloom And loosen when the frost-clouds lower The crisp brown leaves in thicker shower The years shall come and pass but we Shall hear no longer where we lie The summer's songs the autumn's sigh In the boughs of the apple-tree. And time shall waste this apple-tree. Oh when its aged branches throw Thin shadows on the ground below Shall fraud and force and iron will Oppress the weak and helpless still? What shall the tasks of mercy be Amid the toils the strifes the tears Of those who live when length of years Is wasting this little apple-tree? Who planted this old apple-tree? The children of that distant day Thus to some aged man shall say And gazing on its mossy stem The gray-haired man shall answer them: A poet of the land was he, Born in the rude but good old times 'T is said he made some quaint old rhymes On planting the apple-tree. STAND here by my side and turn, I pray, On the lake below thy gentle eyes The clouds hang over it, heavy and gray, And dark and silent the water lies And out of that frozen mist the snow In wavering flakes begins to flow Flake after flake They sink in the dark and silent lake. See how in a living swarm they come From the chambers beyond that misty veil Some hover awhile in air, and some Rush prone from the sky like summer hail. All, dropping swiftly or settling slow, Meet and are still in the depths below Flake after flake Dissolved in the dark and silent lake. Here delicate snow-stars, out of the cloud, Come floating downward in airy play, Like spangles dropped from the glistening crowd That whiten by night the milky-way There broader and burlier masses fall The sullen water buries them all！ Flake after flake All drowned in the dark and silent lake. And some, as on tender wings they glide From their chilly birth-cloud, dim and gray, Are joined in their fall, and, side by side, Come clinging along their unsteady way As friend with friend, or husband with wife, Makes hand in hand the passage of life Each mated flake Soon sinks in the dark and silent lake. Lo! while we are gazing, in swifter haste Stream down the snows, till the air is white, As, myriads by myriads madly chased, They fling themselves from their shadowy height. The fair, frail creatures of middle sky, What speed they make, with their grave so nigh Flake after flake, To lie in the dark and silent lake! I see in thy gentle eyes a tear They turn to me in sorrowful thought Thou thinkest of friends, the good and dear, Who were for a time and now are not Like these fair children of cloud and frost, That glisten a moment and then are lost, Flake after flake！ All lost in the dark and silent lake. Yet look again, for the clouds divide A gleam of blue on the water lies And far away, on the mountain-side, A sunbeam falls from the opening skies. But the hurrying host that flew between The cloud and the water, no more is seen Flake after flake, At rest in the dark and silent lake. up into the silence the green silence with a white earth in it you will(kiss me)go out into the morning the young morning with a warm world in it (kiss me)you will go on into the sunlight the fine sunlight with a firm day in it you will go(kiss me down into your memory and a memory and memory i)kiss me,(will go) this is the garden: colours come and go frail azures fluttering from night's outer wing strong silent greens serenely lingering absolute lights like baths of golden snow. This is the garden: pursed lips do blow upon cool flutes within wide glooms and sing (of harps celestial to the quivering string) invisible faces hauntingly and slow. This is the garden. Time shall surely reap and on Death's blade lie many a flower curled in other lands where other songs be sung yet stand They here enraptured as among The slow deep trees perpetual of sleep some silver-fingered fountain steals the world. O sweet spontaneous earth how often have the doting fingers of prurient philosophers pinched and poked thee has the naughty thumb of science prodded thy beauty .how often have religions taken thee upon their scraggy knees squeezing and buffeting thee that thou mightest conceive gods (but true to the incomparable couch of death thy rhythmic lover thou answerest them only with spring) silence .is a looking bird:the turn ingedge of life (inquiry before snow proud of his scientific attitude and liked the prince of wales wife wants to die but the doctors won't let her comman considers fr ood whom he pronounces young mistaken and cradles in rubbery one somewhat hand the paper destinies of nations sic item a bounceless period unshy the empty house is full O Yes of guk rooms daughter item son a woopsing queer colon hobby photography never has plumbed the heights of prowst but respects artists if they are sincere proud of his scientif ic attitude and liked the king of)hear ye!the godless are the dull and the dull are the damned (once like a spark) if strangers meet life begins- not poor not rich (only aware) kind neither nor cruel (only complete) i not not you not possible only truthful -truthfully once if strangers(who deep our most are selves)touch: forever (and so to dark) Me up at does out of the floor quietly Stare a poisoned mouse still who alive is asking What have i done that You wouldn't have it is at moments after i have dreamed of the rare entertainment of your eyes, when (being fool to fancy) i have deemed with your peculiar mouth my heart made wise at moments when the glassy darkness holds the genuine apparition of your smile (it was through tears always)and silence moulds such strangeness as was mine a little while moments when my once more illustrious arms are filled with fascination, when my breast wears the intolerant brightness of your charms: one pierced moment whiter than the rest -turning from the tremendous lie of sleep i watch the roses of the day grow deep. i shall imagine life is not worth dying if (and when)roses complain their beauties are in vain but though mankind persuades itself that every weed's a rose roses(you feel certain)will only smile i have found what you are like the rain (Who feathers frightened fields with the superior dust-of-sleep. wields easily the pale club of the wind and swirled justly souls of flower strike the air in utterable coolness deeds of green thrilling light with thinne d newfragile blues lurch and.press -in the woods which stutter and sing And the coolness of your smile is stirringofbirds between my armsbut i should rather than anything have(almost when hugeness will shut quietly)almost your kiss Humanity i love you because you would rather black the boots of success than enquire whose soul dangles from his watch-chain which would be embarrassing for both parties and because you unflinchingly applaud all songs containing the words country home and mother when sung at the old howard Humanity i love you because when you're hard up you pawn your intelligence to buy a drink and when you're flush pride keeps you from the pawn shops and because you are continually committing nuisances but more especially in your own house Humanity i love you because you are perpetually putting the secret of life in your pants and forgetting it's there and sitting down on it and because you are forever making poems in the lap of death Humanity i hate you enter no(silence is the blood whose flesh is singing)silence:but unsinging. In spectral such hugest how hush,one dead leaf stirring makes a crash -far away(as far as alive)lies apriland i breathe-move-and-seem some perpetually roaming whylessness- autumn has gone:will winter never come? o come,terrible anonymityenfold phantom me with the murdering minus of cold -open this ghost with millionary knives of wind- scatter his nothing all over what angry skies and gently (very whiteness:absolute peace, never imaginable mystery) descend am was. are leaves few this. is these a or scratchily over which of earth dragged once -ful leaf.  were who skies clutch an of poor how colding hereless. air theres what immense live without every dancing. singless on- ly a child's eyes float silently down more than two those that and that noing our gone snow gone yours mine . We're alive and shall be:cities may overflow(am was)assassinating whole grassblades five ideas can swallow a manthree words im -prison a woman for all her now:but we've such freedom such intense digestion so much greenness only dying makes us grow along the brittle treacherous bright streets of memory comes my heart singing like an idiot whispering like drunken man who(at a certain corner suddenly)meets the tall policeman of my mind. awake being not asleep elsewhere our dreams began which now are folded:but the year completes his life as a forgotten prisoner -"Ici?"-"Ah non mon chriil fait trop froid"- they are gone:along these gardens moves a wind br inging rain and leaves filling the air with fear and sweetness....pauses. (Halfwhispering....half singing stirs the always smiling chevaux de bois) when you were in Paris we met here all which isn't singing is mere talking and all talking's talking to oneself (whether that oneself be sought or seeking master or disciple sheep or wolf) gush to it as diety or devil -toss in sobs and reasons threats and smiles name it cruel fair or blessed evil- it is you (ne i)nobody else drive dumb mankind dizzy with haranguing -you are deafened every mother's son- all is merely talk which isn't singing and all talking's to oneself alone but the very song of(as mountains feel and lovers)singing is silence All in green went my love riding on a great horse of gold into the silver dawn. four lean hounds crouched low and smiling the merry deer ran before. Fleeter be they than dappled dreams the swift sweet deer the red rare deer. Four red roebuck at a white water the cruel bugle sang before. Horn at hip went my love riding riding the echo down into the silver dawn. four lean hounds crouched low and smiling the level meadows ran before. Softer be they than slippered sleep the lean lithe deer the fleet flown deer. Four fleet does at a gold valley the famished arrow sang before. Bow at belt went my love riding riding the mountain down into the silver dawn. four lean hounds crouched low and smiling the sheer peaks ran before. Paler be they than daunting death the sleek slim deer the tall tense deer. Four tell stags at a green mountain the lucky hunter sang before. All in green went my love riding on a great horse of gold into the silver dawn. four lean hounds crouched low and smiling my heart fell dead before. a total stranger one black day knocked living the hell out of me-- who found forgiveness hard because my(as it happened)self he was -but now that fiend and i are such immortal friends the other's each a man who had fallen among thieves lay by the roadside on his back dressed in fifteenthrate ideas wearing a round jeer for a hat fate per a somewhat more than less emancipated evening had in return for consciousness endowed him with a changeless grin whereon a dozen staunch and Meal citizens did graze at pause then fired by hypercivic zeal sought newer pastures or because swaddled with a frozen brook of pinkest vomit out of eyes which noticed nobody he looked as if he did not care to rise one hand did nothing on the vest its wideflung friend clenched weakly dirt while the mute trouserfly confessed a button solemnly inert. Brushing from whom the stiffened puke i put him all into my arms and staggered banged with terror through a million billion trillion stars a clown's smirk in the skull of a baboon (where once good lips stalked or eyes firmly stir red) my mirror gives me on this afternoon i am a shape that can but eat and turd ere with the dirt death shall him vastly gird a coward waiting clumsily to cease whom every perfect thing meanwhile doth miss a hand's impression in an empty glove a soon forgotten tune a house for lease. I have never loved you dear as now i love behold this fool who in the month of June having certain stars and planets heard rose very slowly in a tight balloon until the smallening world became absurd him did an archer spy(whose aim had erred never)and by that little trick or this he shot the aeronaut down into the abyss -and wonderfully i fell through the green groove of twilight striking into many a piece. I have never loved you dear as now i love god's terrible face brighter than a spoon collects the image of one fatal word so that my life(which liked the sun and the moon) resembles something that has not occurred: i am a birdcage without any bird a collar looking for a dog a kiss without lipsa prayer lacking any knees but something beats within my shirt to prove he is undead who living noone is. I have never loved you dear as now i love. Hell(by most humble me which shall increase) open thy fire!for i have had some bliss of one small lady upon earth above to whom i cry remembering her face i have never loved you dear as now i love l(a le af fa ll s) one l iness You are tired (I think) Of the always puzzle of living and doing And so am I. Come with me then And we'll leave it far and far away- (Only you and I understand!) You have played (I think) And broke the toys you were fondest of And are a little tired now Tired of things that break and- Just tired. So am I. But I come with a dream in my eyes tonight And knock with a rose at the hopeless gate of your heart- Open to me! For I will show you the places Nobody knows And if you like The perfect places of Sleep. Ah come with me! I'll blow you that wonderful bubble the moon That floats forever and a day I'll sing you the jacinth song Of the probable stars I will attempt the unstartled steppes of dream Until I find the Only Flower Which shall keep (I think) your little heart While the moon comes out of the sea. anyone lived in a pretty how town (with up so floating many bells down) spring summer autumn winter he sang his didn't he danced his did Women and men(both little and samll) cared for anyone not at all they sowed their isn't they reaped their same sun moon stars rain children guessed(but only a few and down they forgot as up they grew autumn winter spring summer) that noone loved him more by more when by now and tree by leaf she laughed his joy she cried his grief bird by snow and stir by still anyone's any was all to her someones married their everyones laughed their cryings and did their dance (sleep wake hope and then)they said their nevers they slept their dream stars rain sun moon (and only the snow can begin to explain how children are apt to forget to remember with up so floating many bells down) one day anyone died i guess (and noone stooped to kiss his face) busy folk buried them side by side little by little and was by was all by all and deep by deep and more by moe they dream their sleep noone and anyone earth by april wish by spirit and if by yes Women and men(both dong and ding) summer sutumn winter spring reaped their sowing and went their came sun moon stars rain since feeling is first who pays any attention to the syntax of things will never wholly kiss you wholly to be a fool while Spring is in the world my blood approves and kisses are a better fate than wisdom lady i swear by all flowers. Don't cry the best gesture of my brain is less than your eyelids' flutter which says we are for each other: then laugh leaning back in my arms for life's not a paragraph and death i think is no parenthesis Love is more thicker than forget more thinner than recall more seldom than a wave is wet more frequent than to fail It's most mad and moonly and less it shall unbe than all the sea which only is deeper than the sea Love is more always than to win less never than alive less bigger than the least begin less litter than forgive It's most sane and sunly and more it cannot die than all the sky which only is higher than the sky There is another sky, Ever serene and fair, And there is another sunshine, Though it be darkness there Never mind faded forests, Austin, Never mind silent fields - Here is a little forest, Whose leaf is ever green Here is a brighter garden, Where not a frost has been In its unfading flowers I hear the bright bee hum: Prithee, my brother, Into my garden come! If those I loved were lost The Crier's voice would tell me -- If those I loved were found The bells of Ghent would ring -- Did those I loved repose The Daisy would impel me. Philip -- when bewildered Bore his riddle in! You love me -- you are sure -- I shall not fear mistake -- I shall not cheated wake -- Some grinning morn -- To find the Sunrise left -- And Orchards -- unbereft -- And Dollie -- gone! I need not start -- you're sure -- That night will never be -- When frightened -- home to Thee I run -- To find the windows dark -- And no more Dollie -- mark -- Quite none? Be sure you're sure -- you know -- I'll bear it better now -- If you'll just tell me so -- Than when -- a little dull Balm grown -- Over this pain of mine -- Because I could not stop for Death -- He kindly stopped for me -- The Carriage held but just Ourselves -- And Immortality. We slowly drove -- He knew no haste And I had put away My labor and my leisure too, For His Civility -- We passed the School, where Children strove At Recess -- in the Ring -- We passed the Fields of Gazing Grain -- We passed the Setting Sun -- Or rather -- He passed Us -- The Dews drew quivering and chill -- For only Gossamer, my Gown -- My Tippet -- only Tulle -- We paused before a House that seemed A Swelling of the Ground -- The Roof was scarcely visible -- The Cornice -- in the Ground -- Since then -- 'tis Centuries -- and yet Feels shorter than the Day I first surmised the Horses' Heads Were toward Eternity -- To see the Summer Sky Is Poetry, though never in a Book it lie -- True Poems flee -- Nobody knows this little Rose -- It might a pilgrim be Did I not take it from the ways And lift it up to thee. Only a Bee will miss it -- Only a Butterfly, Hastening from far journey -- On its breast to lie -- Only a Bird will wonder -- Only a Breeze will sigh -- Ah Little Rose -- how easy For such as thee to die! I'm Nobody!  Who are you? Are you -- Nobody -- Too? Then there's a pair of us! Don't tell!  they'd advertise -- you know! How dreary -- to be -- Somebody! How public -- like a Frog -- To tell one's name -- the livelong June -- To an admiring Bog! "Faith" is a fine invention When Gentlemen can see -- But Microscopes are prudent In an Emergency. I have a Bird in spring Which for myself doth sing -- The spring decoys. And as the summer nears -- And as the Rose appears, Robin is gone. Yet do I not repine Knowing that Bird of mine Though flown -- Learneth beyond the sea Melody new for me And will return. Fast is a safer hand Held in a truer Land Are mine -- And though they now depart, Tell I my doubting heart They're thine. In a serener Bright, In a more golden light I see Each little doubt and fear, Each little discord here Removed. Then will I not repine, Knowing that Bird of mine Though flown Shall in a distant tree Bright melody for me Return. Awake ye muses nine, sing me a strain divine, Unwind the solemn twine, and tie my Valentine! Oh the Earth was made for lovers, for damsel, and hopeless swain, For sighing, and gentle whispering, and unity made of twain. All things do go a courting, in earth, or sea, or air, God hath made nothing single but thee in His world so fair! The bride, and then the bridegroom, the two, and then the one, Adam, and Eve, his consort, the moon, and then the sun The life doth prove the precept, who obey shall happy be, Who will not serve the sovereign, be hanged on fatal tree. The high do seek the lowly, the great do seek the small, None cannot find who seeketh, on this terrestrial ball The bee doth court the flower, the flower his suit receives, And they make merry wedding, whose guests are hundred leaves The wind doth woo the branches, the branches they are won, And the father fond demandeth the maiden for his son. The storm doth walk the seashore humming a mournful tune, The wave with eye so pensive, looketh to see the moon, Their spirits meet together, they make their solemn vows, No more he singeth mournful, her sadness she doth lose. The worm doth woo the mortal, death claims a living bride, Night unto day is married, morn unto eventide Earth is a merry damsel, and heaven a knight so true, And Earth is quite coquettish, and beseemeth in vain to sue. Now to the application, to the reading of the roll, To bringing thee to justice, and marshalling thy soul: Thou art a human solo, a being cold, and lone, Wilt have no kind companion, thou reap'st what thou hast sown. Hast never silent hours, and minutes all too long, And a deal of sad reflection, and wailing instead of song? There's Sarah, and Eliza, and Emeline so fair, And Harriet, and Susan, and she with curling hair! Thine eyes are sadly blinded, but yet thou mayest see Six true, and comely maidens sitting upon the tree Approach that tree with caution, then up it boldly climb, And seize the one thou lovest, nor care for space, or time! Then bear her to the greenwood, and build for her a bower, And give her what she asketh, jewel, or bird, or flower -- And bring the fife, and trumpet, and beat upon the drum -- And bid the world Goodmorrow, and go to glory home! There is a word Which bears a sword Can pierce an armed man -- It hurls its barbed syllables And is mute again -- But where it fell The saved will tell On patriotic day, Some epauletted Brother Gave his breath away. Wherever runs the breathless sun -- Wherever roams the day -- There is its noiseless onset -- There is its victory! Behold the keenest marksman! The most accomplished shot! Time's sublimest target Is a soul "forgot!" We lose -- because we win -- Gamblers -- recollecting which Toss their dice again! If I should die, And you should live -- And time should gurgle on -- And morn should beam -- And noon should burn -- As it has usual done -- If Birds should build as early And Bees as bustling go -- One might depart at option From enterprise below! 'Tis sweet to know that stocks will stand When we with Daisies lie -- That Commerce will continue -- And Trades as briskly fly -- It makes the parting tranquil And keeps the soul serene -- That gentlemen so sprightly Conduct the pleasing scene! Snow flakes. I counted till they danced so Their slippers leaped the town, And then I took a pencil To note the rebels down. And then they grew so jolly I did resign the prig, And ten of my once stately toes Are marshalled for a jig! I heard a Fly buzz -- when I died -- The Stillness in the Room Was like the Stillness in the Air -- Between the Heaves of Storm -- The Eyes around -- had wrung them dry -- And Breaths were gathering firm For that last Onset -- when the King Be witnessed -- in the Room -- I willed my Keepsakes -- Signed away What portion of me be Assignable -- and then it was There interposed a Fly -- With Blue -- uncertain stumbling Buzz -- Between the light -- and me -- And then the Windows failed -- and then I could not see to see -- Success is counted sweetest By those who ne'er succeed. To comprehend a nectar Requires sorest need. Not one of all the purple Host Who took the Flag today Can tell the definition So clear of Victory As he defeated -- dying -- On whose forbidden ear The distant strains of triumph Burst agonized and clear! Her -- "last Poems" -- Poets -- ended -- Silver -- perished -- with her Tongue -- Not on Record -- bubbled other, Flute -- or Woman -- So divine -- Not unto its Summer -- Morning Robin -- uttered Half the Tune -- Gushed too free for the Adoring -- From the Anglo-Florentine -- Late -- the Praise -- 'Tis dull -- conferring On the Head too High to Crown -- Diadem -- or Ducal Showing -- Be its Grave -- sufficient sign -- Nought -- that We -- No Poet's Kinsman -- Suffocate -- with easy woe -- What, and if, Ourself a Bridegroom -- Put Her down -- in Italy? On this wondrous sea Sailing silently, Ho! Pilot, ho! Knowest thou the shore Where no breakers roar -- Where the storm is o'er? In the peaceful west Many the sails at rest -- The anchors fast -- Thither I pilot thee -- Land Ho! Eternity! Ashore at last! The earth has many keys, Where melody is not Is the unknown peninsula. Beauty is nature's fact. But witness for her land, And witness for her sea, The cricket is her utmost Of elegy to me. 'Tis whiter than an Indian Pipe -- 'Tis dimmer than a Lace -- No stature has it, like a Fog When you approach the place -- Nor any voice imply it here Or intimate it there A spirit -- how doth it accost -- What function hat the Air? This limitless Hyperbole Each one of us shall be -- 'Tis Drama -- if Hypothesis It be not Tragedy -- Heart! We will forget him! You and I -- tonight! You may forget the warmth he gave -- I will forget the light! When you have done, pray tell me That I may straight begin! Haste! lest while you're lagging I remember him! Much Madness is divinest Sense -- To a discerning Eye -- Much Sense -- the starkest Madness -- 'Tis the Majority In this, as All, prevail -- Assent -- and you are sane -- Demur -- you're straightway dangerous -- And handled with a Chain -- Tell all the Truth but tell it slant -- Success in Circuit lies Too bright for our infirm Delight The Truth's superb surprise As Lightning to the Children eased With explanation kind The Truth must dazzle gradually Or every man be blind -- "Sic transit gloria mundi," "How doth the busy bee," "Dum vivimus vivamus," I stay mine enemy! Oh "veni, vidi, vici!" Oh caput cap-a-pie! And oh "memento mori" When I am far from thee! Hurrah for Peter Parley! Hurrah for Daniel Boone! Three cheers, sir, for the gentleman Who first observed the moon! Peter, put up the sunshine Patti, arrange the stars Tell Luna, tea is waiting, And call your brother Mars! Put down the apple, Adam, And come away with me, So shalt thou have a pippin From off my father's tree! I climb the "Hill of Science," I "view the landscape o'er" Such transcendental prospect, I ne'er beheld before! Unto the Legislature My country bids me go I'll take my india rubbers, In case the wind should blow! During my education, It was announced to me That gravitation, stumbling, Fell from an apple tree! The earth upon an axis Was once supposed to turn, By way of a gymnastic In honor of the sun! It was the brave Columbus, A sailing o'er the tide, Who notified the nations Of where I would reside! Mortality is fatal -- Gentility is fine, Rascality, heroic, Insolvency, sublime! Our Fathers being weary, Laid down on Bunker Hill And tho' full many a morning, Yet they are sleeping still, -- The trumpet, sir, shall wake them, In dreams I see them rise, Each with a solemn musket A marching to the skies! A coward will remain, Sir, Until the fight is done But an immortal hero Will take his hat, and run! Good bye, Sir, I am going My country calleth me Allow me, Sir, at parting, To wipe my weeping e'e. In token of our friendship Accept this "Bonnie Doon," And when the hand that plucked it Hath passed beyond the moon, The memory of my ashes Will consolation be Then, farewell, Tuscarora, And farewell, Sir, to thee! Sleep is supposed to be By souls of sanity The shutting of the eye. Sleep is the station grand Down which, on either hand The hosts of witness stand! Morn is supposed to be By people of degree The breaking of the Day. Morning has not occurred! That shall Aurora be -- East of Eternity -- One with the banner gay -- One in the red array -- That is the break of Day! The Soul selects her own Society -- Then -- shuts the Door -- To her divine Majority -- Present no more -- Unmoved -- she notes the Chariots -- pausing -- At her low Gate -- Unmoved -- an Emperor be kneeling Upon her Mat -- I've known her -- from an ample nation -- Choose One -- Then -- close the Valves of her attention -- Like Stone -- After great pain, a formal feeling comes -- The Nerves sit ceremonious, like Tombs -- The stiff Heart questions was it He, that bore, And Yesterday, or Centuries before? The Feet, mechanical, go round -- Of Ground, or Air, or Ought -- A Wooden way Regardless grown, A Quartz contentment, like a stone -- This is the Hour of Lead -- Remembered, if outlived, As Freezing persons, recollect the Snow -- First -- Chill -- then Stupor -- then the letting go -- I felt a Funeral, in my Brain, And Mourners to and fro Kept treading -- treading -- till it seemed That Sense was breaking through -- And when they all were seated, A Service, like a Drum -- Kept beating -- beating -- till I thought My Mind was going numb -- And then I heard them lift a Box And creak across my Soul With those same Boots of Lead, again, Then Space -- began to toll, As all the Heavens were a Bell, And Being, but an Ear, And I, and Silence, some strange Race Wrecked, solitary, here -- And then a Plank in Reason, broke, And I dropped down, and down -- And hit a World, at every plunge, And Finished knowing -- then -- I started Early -- Took my Dog -- And visited the Sea -- The Mermaids in the Basement Came out to look at me -- And Frigates -- in the Upper Floor Extended Hempen Hands -- Presuming Me to be a Mouse -- Aground -- upon the Sands -- But no Man moved Me -- till the Tide Went past my simple Shoe -- And past my Apron -- and my Belt -- And past my Bodice -- too -- And made as He would eat me up -- As wholly as a Dew Upon a Dandelion's Sleeve -- And then -- I started -- too -- And He -- He followed -- close behind -- I felt his Silver Heel Upon my Ankle -- Then my Shoes Would overflow with Pearl -- Until We met the Solid Town -- No One He seemed to know -- And bowing -- with a Mighty look -- At me -- The Sea withdrew -- "Hope" is the thing with feathers -- That perches in the soul -- And sings the tune without the words -- And never stops -- at all -- And sweetest -- in the Gale -- is heard -- And sore must be the storm -- That could abash the little Bird That kept so many warm -- I've heard it in the chillest land -- And on the strangest Sea -- Yet, never, in Extremity, It asked a crumb -- of Me. The feet of people walking home With gayer sandals go -- The Crocus -- til she rises The Vassal of the snow -- The lips at Hallelujah Long years of practise bore Til bye and bye these Bargemen Walked singing on the shore. Pearls are the Diver's farthings Extorted from the Sea -- Pinions -- the Seraph's wagon Pedestrian once -- as we -- Night is the morning's Canvas Larceny -- legacy -- Death, but our rapt attention To Immortality. My figures fail to tell me How far the Village lies -- Whose peasants are the Angels -- Whose Cantons dot the skies -- My Classics veil their faces -- My faith that Dark adores -- Which from its solemn abbeys Such ressurection pours. She slept beneath a tree -- Remembered but by me. I touched her Cradle mute -- She recognized the foot -- Put on her carmine suit And see! I LIKE a church I like a cowl I love a prophet of the soul And on my heart monastic aisles Fall like sweet strains or pensive smiles Yet not for all his faith can see Would I that cowl┬d churchman be. Why should the vest on him allure Which I could not on me endure? Not from a vain or shallow thought His awful Jove young Phidias brought Never from lips of cunning fell The thrilling Delphic oracle: Out from the heart of nature rolled The burdens of the Bible old The litanies of nations came Like the volcano's tongue of flame Up from the burning core below ！ The canticles of love and woe The hand that rounded Peter's dome And groined the aisles of Christian Rome Wrought in a sad sincerity Himself from God he could not free He builded better than he knew！ The conscious stone to beauty grew. Know'st thou what wove yon woodbird's nest Of leaves and feathers from her breast? Or how the fish outbuilt her shell Painting with morn each annual cell? Or how the sacred pine tree adds To her old leaves new myriads? Such and so grew these holy piles Whilst love and terror laid the tiles. Earth proudly wears the Parthenon As the best gem upon her zone And Morning opes with haste her lids To gaze upon the Pyramids O'er England's abbeys bends the sky As on its friends with kindred eye For out of Thought's interior sphere These wonders rose to upper air And Nature gladly gave them place Adopted them into her race And granted them an equal date With Andes and with Ararat. These temples grew as grows the grass Art might obey but not surpass. The passive Master lent his hand To the vast soul that o'er him planned And the same power that reared the shrine Bestrode the tribes that knelt within. Ever the fiery Pentecost Girds with one flame the countless host Trances the heart through chanting choirs And through the priest the mind inspires. The word unto the prophet spoken Was writ on tables yet unbroken The word by seers or sibyls told In groves of oak or fanes of gold Still floats upon the morning wind Still whispers to the willing mind. One accent of the Holy Ghost The heedless world hath never lost. I know what say the fathers wise ！ The Book itself before me lies ！ Old Chrysostom best Augustine And he who blent both in his line The younger Golden Lips or mines Taylor the Shakespeare of divines. His words are music in my ear I see his cowl┬d portrait dear And yet for all his faith could see I would not this good bishop be. On Being Asked Whence Is the Flower IN May, when sea-winds pierced our solitudes, I found the fresh Rhodora in the woods, Spreading its leafless blooms in a damp nook, To please the desert and the sluggish brook. The purple petals, fallen in the pool, Made the black water with their beauty gay Here might the red-bird come his plumes to cool, And court the flower that cheapens his array. Rhodora! if the sages ask thee why This charm is wasted on the earth and sky, Tell them, dear, that if eyes were made for seeing, Then Beauty is its own excuse for being: Why thou wert there, O rival of the rose! I never thought to ask, I never knew: But, in my simple ignorance, suppose The self-same Power that brought me there brought you. BURLY dozing humble-bee Where thou art is clime for me. Let them sail for Porto Rique Far-off heats through seas to seek I will follow thee alone Thou animated torrid-zone! Zigzag steerer desert cheerer Let me chase thy waving lines Keep me nearer me thy hearer Singing over shrubs and vines. Insect lover of the sun Joy of thy dominion! Sailor of the atmosphere Swimmer through the waves of air Voyager of light and noon Epicurean of June Wait I prithee till I come Within earshot of thy hum ！ All without is martyrdom. When the south wind in May days With a net of shining haze Silvers the horizon wall And with softness touching all Tints the human countenance With a color of romance And infusing subtle heats Turns the sod to violets Thou in sunny solitudes Rover of the underwoods The green silence dost displace With thy mellow breezy bass. Hot midsummer's petted crone Sweet to me thy drowsy tone Tells of countless sunny hours Long days and solid banks of flowers Of gulfs of sweetness without bound In Indian wildernesses found Of Syrian peace immortal leisure Firmest cheer and bird-like pleasure. Aught unsavory or unclean Hath my insect never seen But violets and bilberry bells Maple-sap and daffodels Grass with green flag half-mast high Succory to match the sky Columbine with horn of honey Scented fern and agrimony Clover catchfly adder's-tongue And brier-roses dwelt among All beside was unknown waste All was picture as he passed. Wiser far than human seer blue-breeched philosopher! Seeing only what is fair Sipping only what is sweet Thou dost mock at fate and care Leave the chaff and take the wheat. When the fierce northwestern blast Cools sea and land so far and fast Thou already slumberest deep Woe and want thou canst outsleep Want and woe which torture us Thy sleep makes ridiculous. THE MOUNTAIN and the squirrel Had a quarrel And the former called the latter "Little Prig." Bun replied You are doubtless very big But all sorts of things and weather Must be taken in together, To make up a year And a sphere. And I think it no disgrace To occupy my place. If I'm not as large as you, You are not so small as I, And not half so spry. I'll not deny you make A very pretty squirrel track Talents differ all is well and wisely put If I cannot carry forests on my back, Neither can you crack a nut. O FAIR and stately maid whose eyes Were kindled in the upper skies At the same torch that lighted mine For so I must interpret still Thy sweet dominion o'er my will A sympathy divine. Ah! let me blameless gaze upon Features that seem at heart my own Nor fear those watchful sentinels Who charm the more their glance forbids Chaste-glowing underneath their lids With fire that draws while it repels. Sung at the Completion of the Battle Monument April BY the rude bridge that arched the flood Their flag to April's breeze unfurled Here once the embattled farmers stood And fired the shot heard round the world. The foe long since in silence slept Alike the conqueror silent sleeps And Time the ruined bridge has swept Down the dark stream which seaward creeps. On this green bank by this soft stream We set to-day a votive stone That memory may their deed redeem When like our sires our sons are gone. Spirit that made those heroes dare To die and leave their children free Bid Time and Nature gently spare The shaft we raise to them and thee. DAUGHTERS of Time the hypocritic Days Muffled and dumb like barefoot dervishes And marching single in an endless file Bring diadems and fagots in their hands. To each they offer gifts after his will Bread kingdoms stars and sky that holds them all. I in my pleach┬d garden watched the pomp Forgot my morning wishes hastily Took a few herbs and apples and the Day Turned and departed silent. I too late Under her solemn fillet saw the scorn. TO clothe the fiery thought In simple words succeeds For still the craft of genius is To mask a king in weeds. From the French SOME of the hurts you have cured And the sharpest you still have survived But what torments of grief you endured From evils which never arrived! SHINES the last age the next with hope is seen To-day slinks poorly off unmarked between: Future or Past no richer secret folds O friendless Present! than thy bosom holds. THOUGH love repine and reason chafe There came a voice without reply ！ 'T is man's perdition to be safe, When for the truth he ought to die. I SEE all human wits Are measured but a few Unmeasured still my Shakespeare sits Lone as the blessed Jew. IF the red slayer think he slays Or if the slain think he is slain They know not well the subtle ways I keep and pass and turn again. Far or forgot to me is near Shadow and sunlight are the same The vanished gods to me appear And one to me are shame and fame. They reckon ill who leave me out When me they fly I am the wings I am the doubter and the doubt And I the hymn the Brahmin sings. The strong gods pine for my abode And pine in vain the sacred Seven But thou meek lover of the good! Find me and turn thy back on heaven. GIVE all to love Obey thy heart Friends kindred days Estate good fame Plans credit and the Muse！ Nothing refuse. 'Tis a brave master Let it have scope: Follow it utterly Hope beyond hope: High and more high It dives into noon With wing unspent Untold intent But it is a god Knows its own path And the outlets of the sky. It was never for the mean It requireth courage stout Souls above doubt Valour unbending: Such 'twill reward！ They shall return More than they were And ever ascending. Leave all for love Yet hear me yet One word more thy heart behoved One pulse more of firm endeavour！ Keep thee to-day To-morrow for ever Free as an Arab Of thy beloved. Cling with life to the maid But when the surprise First vague shadow of surmise Flits across her bosom young Of a joy apart from thee Free be she fancy-free Nor thou detain her vesture's hem Nor the palest rose she flung From her summer diadem. Though thou loved her as thyself As a self of purer clay Though her parting dims the day Stealing grace from all alive Heartily know When half-gods go The gods arrive. IT fell in the ancient periods Which the brooding soul surveys Or ever the wild Time coin'd itself Into calendar months and days. This was the lapse of Uriel Which in Paradise befell. Once among the Pleiads walking Sayd overheard the young gods talking And the treason too long pent To his ears was evident. The young deities discuss'd Laws of form and metre just Orb quintessence and sunbeams What subsisteth and what seems. One with low tones that decide And doubt and reverend use defied With a look that solved the sphere And stirr'd the devils everywhere Gave his sentiment divine Against the being of a line. 'Line in nature is not found Unit and universe are round In vain produced all rays return Evil will bless and ice will burn.' As Uriel spoke with piercing eye A shudder ran around the sky The stern old war-gods shook their heads The seraphs frown'd from myrtle-beds Seem'd to the holy festival The rash word boded ill to all The balance-beam of Fate was bent The bounds of good and ill were rent Strong Hades could not keep his own But all slid to confusion. A sad self-knowledge withering fell On the beauty of Uriel In heaven once eminent the god Withdrew that hour into his cloud Whether doom'd to long gyration In the sea of generation Or by knowledge grown too bright To hit the nerve of feebler sight. Straightway a forgetting wind Stole over the celestial kind And their lips the secret kept If in ashes the fire-seed slept. But now and then truth-speaking things Shamed the angels' veiling wings And shrilling from the solar course Or from fruit of chemic force Procession of a soul in matter Or the speeding change of water Or out of the good of evil born Came Uriel's voice of cherub scorn And a blush tinged the upper sky And the gods shook they knew not why. BRING me wine but wine which never grew In the belly of the grape Or grew on vine whose tap-roots reaching through Under the Andes to the Cape Suffer'd no savour of the earth to 'scape. Let its grapes the morn salute From a nocturnal root Which feels the acrid juice Of Styx and Erebus And turns the woe of Night By its own craft to a more rich delight. We buy ashes for bread We buy diluted wine Give me of the true Whose ample leaves and tendrils curl'd Among the silver hills of heaven Draw everlasting dew Wine of wine Blood of the world Form of forms and mould of statures That I intoxicated And by the draught assimilated May float at pleasure through all natures The bird-language rightly spell And that which roses say so well: Wine that is shed Like the torrents of the sun Up the horizon walls Or like the Atlantic streams which run When the South Sea calls. Water and bread Food which needs no transmuting Rainbow-flowering wisdom-fruiting Wine which is already man Food which teach and reason can. Wine which Music is ！ Music and wine are one ！ That I drinking this Shall hear far Chaos talk with me Kings unborn shall walk with me And the poor grass shall plot and plan What it will do when it is man. Quicken'd so will I unlock Every crypt of every rock. I thank the joyful juice For all I know Winds of remembering Of the ancient being blow And seeming-solid walls of use Open and flow. Pour Bacchus! the remembering wine Retrieve the loss of me and mine! Vine for vine be antidote And the grape requite the lote! Haste to cure the old despair Reason in Nature's lotus drench'd！ The memory of ages quench'd！ Give them again to shine Let wine repair what this undid And where the infection slid A dazzling memory revive Refresh the faded tints Recut the ag┬d prints And write my old adventures with the pen Which on the first day drew Upon the tablets blue The dancing Pleiads and eternal men. Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both And be one traveler, long I stood And looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth Then took the other, as just as fair, And having perhaps the better claim, Because it was grassy and wanted wear Though as for that the passing there Had worn them really about the same, And both that morning equally lay In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh, I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence: Two roads diverged in a wood, and I- I took the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference. Whose woods these are I think I know. His house is in the village, though He will not see me stopping here To watch his woods fill up with snow. My little horse must think it queer To stop without a farmhouse near Between the woods and frozen lake The darkest evening of the year. He gives his harness bells a shake To ask if there is some mistake. The only other sound's the sweep Of easy wind and downy flake. The woods are lovely, dark and deep, But I have promises to keep, And miles to go before I sleep, And miles to go before I sleep. Afield at dusk What things for dream there are when specter-like, Moving amond tall haycocks lightly piled, I enter alone upon the stubbled filed, From which the laborers' voices late have died, And in the antiphony of afterglow And rising full moon, sit me down Upon the full moon's side of the first haycock And lose myself amid so many alike. I dream upon the opposing lights of the hour, Preventing shadow until the moon prevail I dream upon the nighthawks peopling heaven, Or plunging headlong with fierce twang afar And on the bat's mute antics, who would seem Dimly to have made out my secret place, Only to lose it when he pirouettes, On the last swallow's sweep and on the rasp In the abyss of odor and rustle at my back, That, silenced by my advent, finds once more, After an interval, his instrument, And tries once--twice--and thrice if I be there And on the worn book of old-golden song I brought not here to read, it seems, but hold And freshen in this air of withering sweetness But on the memor of one absent, most, For whom these lines when they shall greet her eye. Nature's first green is gold, Her hardest hue to hold. Her early leaf's a flower But only so an hour. Then leaf subsides to leaf. So Eden sank to grief, So dawn goes down to day. Nothing gold can stay. When I see birches bend to left and right Across the lines of straighter darker trees, I like to think some boy's been swinging them. But swinging doesn't bend them down to stay. Ice-storms do that. Often you must have seen them Loaded with ice a sunny winter morning After a rain. They click upon themselves As the breeze rises, and turn many-coloured As the stir cracks and crazes their enamel. Soon the sun's warmth makes them shed crystal shells Shattering and avalanching on the snow-crust Such heaps of broken glass to sweep away You'd think the inner dome of heaven had fallen. They are dragged to the withered bracken by the load, And they seem not to break though once they are bowed So low for long, they never right themselves: You may see their trunks arching in the woods Years afterwards, trailing their leaves on the ground, Like girls on hands and knees that throw their hair Before them over their heads to dry in the sun. But I was going to say when Truth broke in With all her matter-of-fact about the ice-storm, I should prefer to have some boy bend them As he went out and in to fetch the cows-- Some boy too far from town to learn baseball, Whose only play was what he found himself, Summer or winter, and could play alone. One by one he subdued his father's trees By riding them down over and over again Until he took the stiffness out of them, And not one but hung limp, not one was left For him to conquer. He learned all there was To learn about not launching out too soon And so not carrying the tree away Clear to the ground. He always kept his poise To the top branches, climbing carefully With the same pains you use to fill a cup Up to the brim, and even above the brim. Then he flung outward, feet first, with a swish, Kicking his way down through the air to the ground. So was I once myself a swinger of birches. And so I dream of going back to be. It's when I'm weary of considerations, And life is too much like a pathless wood Where your face burns and tickles with the cobwebs Broken across it, and one eye is weeping From a twig's having lashed across it open. I'd like to get away from earth awhile And then come back to it and begin over. May no fate wilfully misunderstand me And half grant what I wish and snatch me away Not to return. Earth's the right place for love: I don't know where it's likely to go better. I'd like to go by climbing a birch tree~ And climb black branches up a snow-white trunk Toward heaven, till the tree could bear no more, But dipped its top and set me down again. That would be good both going and coming back. One could do worse than be a swinger of birches. I DWELL in a lonely house I know That vanished many a summer ago, And left no trace but the cellar walls, And a cellar in which the daylight falls, And the purple-stemmed wild raspberries grow. O'er ruined fences the grape-vines shield The woods come back to the mowing field The orchard tree has grown one copse Of new wood and old where the woodpecker chops The footpath down to the well is healed. I dwell with a strangely aching heart In that vanished abode there far apart On that disused and forgotten road That has no dust-bath now for the toad. Night comes the black bats tumble and dart The whippoorwill is coming to shout And hush and cluck and flutter about: I hear him begin far enough away Full many a time to say his say Before he arrives to say it out. It is under the small, dim, summer star. I know not who these mute folk are Who share the unlit place with me-- Those stones out under the low-limbed tree Doubtless bear names that the mosses mar. They are tireless folk, but slow and sad, Though two, close-keeping, are lass and lad,-- With none among them that ever sings, And yet, in view of how many things, As sweet companions as might be had. How countlessly they congregate O'er our tumultuous snow, Which flows in shapes as tall as trees When wintry winds do blow!-- As if with keeness for our fate, Our faltering few steps on To white rest, and a place of rest Invisible at dawn,-- And yet with neither love nor hate, Those starts like somw snow-white Minerva's snow-white marble eyes Without the gift of sight. Some say the world will end in fire, Some say in ice. From what I've tasted of desire I hold with those who favour fire. But if it had to perish twice, I think I know enough of hate To say that for destruction ice Is also great And would suffice. Something there is that doesn't love a wall, That sends the frozen-ground-swell under it And spills the upper boulder in the sun, And make gaps even two can pass abreast. The work of hunters is another thing: I have come after them and made repair Where they have left not one stone on a stone, But they would have the rabbit out of hiding, To please the yelping dogs. The gaps I mean, No one has seen them made or heard them made, But at spring mending-time we find them there, I let my neighbor know beyond the hill And on a day we meet to walk the line And set the wall between us once again. We keep the wall between us as we go. To each the boulders that have fallen to each. And some are loaves and some so nearly balls We have to use a spell to make them balance: "Stay where you are until our backs are turned!" We wear our fingers rough with handling them. Oh, just another kind of outdoor game, One on a side. It comes to little more: There were it is we do not need the wall: He is all pine and I am apple orchard. My apple trees will never get across And eat the cones under his pines, I tell him. He only says, "Good fences make good neighbors." Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder If I could put a notion in his head: "Why do they make good neighbors? Isn't it Where there are cows? But here there are no cows. Before I built a wall I'd ask to know What I was walling in or walling out, And to whom I was like to give offense. Something there is that doesn't love a wall, That wants it down." I could say "Elves" to him, But it's not elves exactly, and I'd rather He said it for himself. I see him there, Bringing a stone grasped firmly by the top In each hand, like an old-stone savage armed. He moves in darkness as it seems to me, Not of woods only and the shade of trees. He will not go behind his father's saying, And he likes having though of it so well He says again, "Good fences make good neighbors." One of my wishes is that those dark trees, So old and firm they scarcely show the breeze, Were not, as 'twere, the merest mask of gloom, But stretched away unto th eedge of doom. I should not be withheld but that some day into their vastness I should steal away, Fearless of ever finding open land, or highway where the slow wheel pours the sand. I do not see why I should e'er turn back, Or those should not set forth upon my track To overtake me, who should miss me here And long to know if still I held them dear. They would not find me changed from him the knew-- Only more sure of all I though was true. Thine emulous fond flowers are dead, too, And the daft sun-assaulter, he That frightened thee so oft, is fled or dead: Saave only me (Nor is it sad to thee!) Save only me There is none left to mourn thee in the fields. The gray grass is scarce dappled with the snow Its two banks have not shut upon the river But it is long ago-- It seems forever-- Since first I saw thee glance, WIth all thy dazzling other ones, In airy dalliance, Precipitate in love, Tossed, tangled, whirled and whirled above, Like a linp rose-wreath in a fairy dance. When that was, the soft mist Of my regret hung not on all the land, And I was glad for thee, And glad for me, I wist. Thou didst not know, who tottered, wandering on high, That fate had made thee for the pleasure of the wind, With those great careless wings, Nor yet did I. And there were othe rthings: It seemed God let thee flutter from his gentle clasp: Then fearful he had let thee win Too far beyond him to be gathered in, Santched thee, o'ereager, with ungentle gasp. Ah! I remember me How once conspiracy was rife Against my life-- The languor of it and the dreaming fond Surging, the grasses dizzied me of thought, The breeze three odors brought, And a gem-flower waved in a wand! Then when I was distraught And could not speak, Sidelong, full on my cheek, What should that reckless zephyr fling But the wild touch of thy dye-dusty wing! I found that wing broken today! For thou art dead, I said, And the strang birds say. I found it with the withered leaves Under the eaves. When I go up through the mowing field, The headless aftermath, Smooth-laid like thatch with the heavy dew, Half closes the garden path. And when I come to the garden ground, The whir of sober birds Up from the tangle of withered weeds Is sadder than any words A tree beside the wall stands bare, But a leaf that lingered brown, Disturbed, I doubt not, by my thought, Comes softly rattling down. I end not far from my going forth By picking the faded blue Of the last remaining aster flower To carry again to you. He is that fallen lance that lies as hurled, That lies unlifted now, come dew, come rust, But still lies pointed as it ploughed the dust. If we who sight along it round the world, See nothing worthy to have been its mark, It is because like men we look too near, Forgetting that as fitted to the sphere, Our missiles always make too short an arc. They fall, they rip the grass, they intersect The curve of earth, and striking, break their own They make us cringe for metal-point on stone. But this we know, the obstacle that checked And tripped the body, shot the spirit on Further than target ever showed or shone. A stranger came to the door at eve, And he spoke the bridegroom fair. He bore a green-white stick in his hand, And, for all burden, care. He asked with the eyes more than the lips For a shelter for the night, And he turned and looked at the road afar Without a window light. The bridegroom came forth into the porch With, 'Let us look at the sky, And question what of the night to be, Stranger, you and I.' The woodbine leaves littered the yard, The woodbine berries were blue, Autumn, yes, winter was in the wind 'Stranger, I wish I knew.' Within, the bride in the dusk alone Bent over the open fire, Her face rose-red with the glowing coal And the thought of the heart's desire. The bridegroom looked at the weary road, Yet saw but her within, And wished her heart in a case of gold And pinned with a silver pin. The bridegroom thought it little to give A dole of bread, a purse, A heartfelt prayer for the poor of God, Or for the rich a curse But whether or not a man was asked To mar the love of two By harboring woe in the bridal house, The bridegroom wished he knew. A house that lacks, seemingly, mistress and master, With doors that none but the wind ever closes, Its floor all littered with glass and with plaster It stands in a garden of old-fashioned roses. I pass by that way in the gloaming with Mary 'I wonder,' I say, 'who the owner of those is.' 'Oh, no one you know,' she answers me airy, 'But one we must ask if we want any roses.' So we must join hands in the dew coming coldly There in the hush of the wood that reposes, And turn and go up to the open door boldly, And knock to the echoes as beggars for roses. 'Pray, are you within there, Mistress Who-were-you?' 'Tis Mary that speaks and our errand discloses. 'Pray, are you within there? Bestir you, bestir you! 'Tis summer again there's two come for roses. 'A word with you, that of the singer recalling-- Old Herrick: a saying that every maid knows is A flower unplucked is but left to the falling, And nothing is gained by not gathering roses.' We do not loosen our hands' intertwining (Not caring so very much what she supposes), There when she comes on us mistily shining And grants us by silence the boon of her roses. My long two-pointed ladder's sticking through a tree Toward heaven still, And there's a barrel that I didn't fill Beside it, and there may be two or three Apples I didn't pick upon some bough. But I am done with apple-picking now. Essence of winter sleep is on the night, The scent of apples: I am drowsing off. I cannot rub the strangeness from my sight I got from looking through a pane of glass I skimmed this morning from the drinking trough And held against the world of hoary grass. It melted, and I let it fall and break. But I was well Upon my way to sleep before it fell, And I could tell What form my dreaming was about to take. Magnified apples appear and disappear, Stem end and blossom end, And every fleck of russet showing dear. My instep arch not only keeps the ache, It keeps the pressure of a ladder-round. I feel the ladder sway as the boughs bend. And I keep hearing from the cellar bin The rumbling sound Of load on load of apples coming in. For I have had too much Of apple-picking: I am overtired Of the great harvest I myself desired. There were ten thousand thousand fruit to touch, Cherish in hand, lift down, and not let fall. For all That struck the earth, No matter if not bruised or spiked with stubble, Went surely to the cider-apple heap As of no worth. One can see what will trouble This sleep of mine, whatever sleep it is. Were he not gone, The woodchuck could say whether it's like his Long sleep, as I describe its coming on, Or just some human sleep. Mary sat musing on the lamp-flame at the table Waiting for Warren. When she heard his step, She ran on tip-toe down the darkened passage To meet him in the doorway with the news And put him on his guard. 'Silas is back.' She pushed him outward with her through the door And shut it after her. "Be kind,' she said. She took the market things from Warren's arms And set them on the porch, then drew him down To sit beside her on the wooden steps. 'When was I ever anything but kind to him? But I'll not have the fellow back,' he said. 'I told him so last haying, didn't I? "If he left then," I said, "that ended it." What good is he? Who else will harbour him At his age for the little he can do? What help he is there's no depending on. Off he goes always when I need him most. 'He thinks he ought to earn a little pay, Enough at least to buy tobacco with, won't have to beg and be beholden." "All right," I say "I can't afford to pay Any fixed wages, though I wish I could." "Someone else can." "Then someone else will have to. I shouldn't mind his bettering himself If that was what it was. You can be certain, When he begins like that, there's someone at him Trying to coax him off with pocket-money, -- In haying time, when any help is scarce. In winter he comes back to us. I'm done.' 'Shh I not so loud: he'll hear you,' Mary said. 'I want him to: he'll have to soon or late.' 'He's worn out. He's asleep beside the stove. When I came up from Rowe's I found him here, Huddled against the barn-door fast asleep, A miserable sight, and frightening, too- You needn't smile -- I didn't recognize him- I wasn't looking for him- and he's changed. Wait till you see.' 'Where did you say he'd been? 'He didn't say. I dragged him to the house, And gave him tea and tried to make him smoke. I tried to make him talk about his travels. Nothing would do: he just kept nodding off.' 'What did he say? Did he say anything?' 'But little.' 'Anything? Mary, confess He said he'd come to ditch the meadow for me.' 'Warren!' 'But did he? I just want to know.' 'Of course he did. What would you have him say? Surely you wouldn't grudge the poor old man Some humble way to save his self-respect. He added, if you really care to know, He meant to dear the upper pasture, too. That sounds like something you have heard before? Warren, I wish you could have heard the way He jumbled everything. I stopped to look Two or three times -- he made me feel so queer-- To see if he was talking in his sleep. He ran on Harold Wilson -- you remember - The boy you had in haying four years since. He's finished school, and teaching in his college. Silas declares you'll have to get him back. He says they two will make a team for work: Between them they will lay this farm as smooth! The way he mixed that in with other things. He thinks young Wilson a likely lad, though daft On education -- you know how they fought All through July under the blazing sun, Silas up on the cart to build the load, Harold along beside to pitch it on.' 'Yes, I took care to keep well out of earshot.' 'Well, those days trouble Silas like a dream. You wouldn't think they would. How some things linger! Harold's young college boy's assurance piqued him. After so many years he still keeps finding Good arguments he sees he might have used. I sympathize. I know just how it feels To think of the right thing to say too late. Harold's associated in his mind with Latin. He asked me what I thought of Harold's saying He studied Latin like the violin Because he liked it -- that an argument! He said he couldn't make the boy believe He could find water with a hazel prong-- Which showed how much good school had ever done him. He wanted to go over that. 'But most of all He thinks if he could have another chance To teach him how to build a load of hay --' 'I know, that's Silas' one accomplishment. He bundles every forkful in its place, And tags and numbers it for future reference, So he can find and easily dislodge it In the unloading. Silas does that well. He takes it out in bunches like big birds' nests. You never see him standing on the hay He's trying to lift, straining to lift himself.' 'He thinks if he could teach him that, he'd be Some good perhaps to someone in the world. He hates to see a boy the fool of books. Poor Silas, so concerned for other folk, And nothing to look backward to with pride, And nothing to look forward to with hope, So now and never any different.' Part of a moon was filling down the west, Dragging the whole sky with it to the hills. Its light poured softly in her lap. She saw And spread her apron to it. She put out her hand Among the harp-like morning-glory strings, Taut with the dew from garden bed to eaves, As if she played unheard the tenderness That wrought on him beside her in the night. 'Warren,' she said, 'he has come home to die: You needn't be afraid he'll leave you this time.' 'Home,' he mocked gently. 'Yes, what else but home? It all depends on what you mean by home. Of course he's nothing to us, any more then was the hound that came a stranger to us Out of the woods, worn out upon the trail.' 'Home is the place where, when you have to go there, They have to take you in.' 'I should have called it Something you somehow haven't to deserve.' Warren leaned out and took a step or two, Picked up a little stick, and brought it back And broke it in his hand and tossed it by. 'Silas has better claim on' us, you think, Than on his brother? Thirteen little miles As the road winds would bring him to his door. Silas has walked that far no doubt to-day. Why didn't he go there? His brother's rich, A somebody- director in the bank.' 'He never told us that.' 'We know it though.' 'I think his brother ought to help, of course. I'll see to that if there is need. He ought of right To take him in, and might be willing to- He may be better than appearances. But have some pity on Silas. Do you think If he'd had any pride in claiming kin Or anything he looked for from his brother, He'd keep so still about him all this time?' 'I wonder what's between them.' 'I can tell you. Silas is what he is -- we wouldn't mind him-- But just the kind that kinsfolk can't abide. He never did a thing so very bad. He don't know why he isn't quite as good As anyone. He won't be made ashamed To please his brother, worthless though he is.' 'I can't think Si ever hurt anyone.' 'No, but he hurt my heart the way he lay And rolled his old head on that sharp-edged chair-back. He wouldn't let me put him on the lounge. You must go in and see what you can do. I made the bed up for him there to-night. You'll be surprised at him -- how much he's broken. His working days are done I'm sure of it.' 'I'd not be in a hurry to say that.' 'I haven't been. Go, look, see for yourself. But, Warren, please remember how it is: He' come to help you ditch the meadow. He has a plan, You mustn't laugh at him. He may not speak of it, and then he may. I'll sit and see if that small sailing cloud Will hit or miss the moon.' It hit the moon.Then there were three there, making a dim row, The moon, the little silver cloud, and she. Warren returned-- too soon, it seemed to her, Slipped to her side, caught up her hand and waited. 'Warren?' she questioned. 'Dead,' was all he answered. O hushed October morning mild, Thy leaves have ripened to the fall Tomorrow's wind, if it be wild, Should waste them all. The crows above the forest call Tomorrow they may form and go. O hushed October morning mild, Begin the hours of this day slow. Make the day seem to us less brief. Hearts not averse to being beguiled, Beguile us in the way you know. Release one leaf at break of day At noon release another leaf One from our trees, one far away. Retard the sun with gentle mist Enchant the land with amethyst. Slow, slow! For the grapes' sake, if the were all, Whose elaves already are burnt with frost, Whose clustered fruit must else be lost-- For the grapes' sake along the all. I have been one acquainted with the night. I have walked out in rain --and back in rain. I have outwalked the furthest city light. I have looked down the saddest city lane. I have passed by the watchman on his beat And dropped my eyes, unwilling to explain. I have stood still and stopped the sound of feet When far away an interrupted cry Came over houses from another street, But not to call me back or say good-bye And further still at an unearthly height One luminary clock against the sky Proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right. I have been one acquainted with the night. In going from room to room in the dark, I reached out blindly to save my face, But neglected, however lightly, to lace My fingers and close my arms in an arc. A slim door got in past my guard, And hit me a blow in the head so hard I had my native simile jarred. So people and things don't pair any more With what they used to pair with before. - For Carl Solomon I I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked, dragging themselves through the negro streets at dawn looking for an angry fix, angelheaded hipsters burning for the ancient heavenly connection to the starry dynamo in the machin- ery of night, who poverty and tatters and hollow-eyed and high sat up smoking in the supernatural darkness of cold-water flats floating across the tops of cities contemplating jazz, who bared their brains to Heaven under the El and saw Mohammedan angels staggering on tene- ment roofs illuminated, who passed through universities with radiant cool eyes hallucinating Arkansas and Blake-light tragedy among the scholars of war, who were expelled from the academies for crazy &amp publishing obscene odes on the windows of the skull, who cowered in unshaven rooms in underwear, burn- ing their money in wastebaskets and listening to the Terror through the wall, who got busted in their pubic beards returning through Laredo with a belt of marijuana for New York, who ate fire in paint hotels or drank turpentine in Paradise Alley, death, or purgatoried their torsos night after night with dreams, with drugs, with waking nightmares, al- cohol and cock and endless balls, incomparable blind streets of shuddering cloud and lightning in the mind leaping toward poles of Canada &amp Paterson, illuminating all the mo- tionless world of Time between, Peyote solidities of halls, backyard green tree cemetery dawns, wine drunkenness over the rooftops, storefront boroughs of teahead joyride neon blinking traffic light, sun and moon and tree vibrations in the roaring winter dusks of Brook- lyn, ashcan rantings and kind king light of mind, who chained themselves to subways for the endless ride from Battery to holy Bronx on benzedrine until the noise of wheels and children brought them down shuddering mouth-wracked and battered bleak of brain all drained of brilliance in the drear light of Zoo, who sank all night in submarine light of Bickford's floated out and sat through the stale beer after noon in desolate Fugazzi's, listening to the crack of doom on the hydrogen jukebox, who talked continuously seventy hours from park to pad to bar to Bellevue to museum to the Brook- lyn Bridge, lost battalion of platonic conversationalists jumping down the stoops off fire escapes off windowsills off Empire State out of the moon, yacketayakking screaming vomiting whispering facts and memories and anecdotes and eyeball kicks and shocks of hospitals and jails and wars, whole intellects disgorged in total recall for seven days and nights with brilliant eyes, meat for the Synagogue cast on the pavement, who vanished into nowhere Zen New Jersey leaving a trail of ambiguous picture postcards of Atlantic City Hall, suffering Eastern sweats and Tangerian bone-grind- ings and migraines of China under junk-with- drawal in Newark's bleak furnished room, who wandered around and around at midnight in the railroad yard wondering where to go, and went, leaving no broken hearts, who lit cigarettes in boxcars boxcars boxcars racketing through snow toward lonesome farms in grand- father night, who studied Plotinus Poe St. John of the Cross telep- athy and bop kabbalah because the cosmos in- stinctively vibrated at their feet in Kansas, who loned it through the streets of Idaho seeking vis- ionary indian angels who were visionary indian angels, who thought they were only mad when Baltimore gleamed in supernatural ecstasy, who jumped in limousines with the Chinaman of Okla- homa on the impulse of winter midnight street light smalltown rain, who lounged hungry and lonesome through Houston seeking jazz or sex or soup, and followed the brilliant Spaniard to converse about America and Eternity, a hopeless task, and so took ship to Africa, who disappeared into the volcanoes of Mexico leaving behind nothing but the shadow of dungarees and the lava and ash of poetry scattered in fire place Chicago, who reappeared on the West Coast investigating the F.B.I. in beards and shorts with big pacifist eyes sexy in their dark skin passing out incom- prehensible leaflets, who burned cigarette holes in their arms protesting the narcotic tobacco haze of Capitalism, who distributed Supercommunist pamphlets in Union Square weeping and undressing while the sirens of Los Alamos wailed them down, and wailed down Wall, and the Staten Island ferry also wailed, who broke down crying in white gymnasiums naked and trembling before the machinery of other skeletons, who bit detectives in the neck and shrieked with delight in policecars for committing no crime but their own wild cooking pederasty and intoxication, who howled on their knees in the subway and were dragged off the roof waving genitals and manu- scripts, who let themselves be fucked in the ass by saintly motorcyclists, and screamed with joy, who blew and were blown by those human seraphim, the sailors, caresses of Atlantic and Caribbean love, who balled in the morning in the evenings in rose gardens and the grass of public parks and cemeteries scattering their semen freely to whomever come who may, who hiccuped endlessly trying to giggle but wound up with a sob behind a partition in a Turkish Bath when the blond &amp naked angel came to pierce them with a sword, who lost their loveboys to the three old shrews of fate the one eyed shrew of the heterosexual dollar the one eyed shrew that winks out of the womb and the one eyed shrew that does nothing but sit on her ass and snip the intellectual golden threads of the craftsman's loom, who copulated ecstatic and insatiate with a bottle of beer a sweetheart a package of cigarettes a can- dle and fell off the bed, and continued along the floor and down the hall and ended fainting on the wall with a vision of ultimate cunt and come eluding the last gyzym of consciousness, who sweetened the snatches of a million girls trembling in the sunset, and were red eyed in the morning but prepared to sweeten the snatch of the sun rise, flashing buttocks under barns and naked in the lake, who went out whoring through Colorado in myriad stolen night-cars, N.C., secret hero of these poems, cocksman and Adonis of Denver-joy to the memory of his innumerable lays of girls in empty lots &amp diner backyards, moviehouses' rickety rows, on mountaintops in caves or with gaunt waitresses in familiar roadside lonely pet- ticoat upliftings &amp especially secret gas-station solipsisms of johns, &amp hometown alleys too, who faded out in vast sordid movies, were shifted in dreams, woke on a sudden Manhattan, and picked themselves up out of basements hung over with heartless Tokay and horrors of Third Avenue iron dreams &amp stumbled to unemploy- ment offices, who walked all night with their shoes full of blood on the snowbank docks waiting for a door in the East River to open to a room full of steamheat and opium, who created great suicidal dramas on the apartment cliff-banks of the Hudson under the wartime blue floodlight of the moon &amp their heads shall be crowned with laurel in oblivion, who ate the lamb stew of the imagination or digested the crab at the muddy bottom of the rivers of Bowery, who wept at the romance of the streets with their pushcarts full of onions and bad music, who sat in boxes breathing in the darkness under the bridge, and rose up to build harpsichords in their lofts, who coughed on the sixth floor of Harlem crowned with flame under the tubercular sky surrounded by orange crates of theology, who scribbled all night rocking and rolling over lofty incantations which in the yellow morning were stanzas of gibberish, who cooked rotten animals lung heart feet tail borsht &amp tortillas dreaming of the pure vegetable kingdom, who plunged themselves under meat trucks looking for an egg, who threw their watches off the roof to cast their ballot for Eternity outside of Time, &amp alarm clocks fell on their heads every day for the next decade, who cut their wrists three times successively unsuccess- fully, gave up and were forced to open antique stores where they thought they were growing old and cried, who were burned alive in their innocent flannel suits on Madison Avenue amid blasts of leaden verse &amp the tanked-up clatter of the iron regiments of fashion &amp the nitroglycerine shrieks of the fairies of advertising &amp the mustard gas of sinis- ter intelligent editors, or were run down by the drunken taxicabs of Absolute Reality, who jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge this actually hap- pened and walked away unknown and forgotten into the ghostly daze of Chinatown soup alley ways &amp firetrucks, not even one free beer, who sang out of their windows in despair, fell out of the subway window, jumped in the filthy Pas- saic, leaped on negroes, cried all over the street, danced on broken wineglasses barefoot smashed phonograph records of nostalgic European s German jazz finished the whiskey and threw up groaning into the bloody toilet, moans in their ears and the blast of colossal steam whistles, who barreled down the highways of the past journeying to each other's hotrod-Golgotha jail-solitude watch or Birmingham jazz incarnation, who drove crosscountry seventytwo hours to find out if I had a vision or you had a vision or he had a vision to find out Eternity, who journeyed to Denver, who died in Denver, who came back to Denver &amp waited in vain, who watched over Denver &amp brooded &amp loned in Denver and finally went away to find out the Time, &amp now Denver is lonesome for her heroes, who fell on their knees in hopeless cathedrals praying for each other's salvation and light and breasts, until the soul illuminated its hair for a second, who crashed through their minds in jail waiting for impossible criminals with golden heads and the charm of reality in their hearts who sang sweet blues to Alcatraz, who retired to Mexico to cultivate a habit, or Rocky Mount to tender Buddha or Tangiers to boys or Southern Pacific to the black locomotive or Harvard to Narcissus to Woodlawn to the daisychain or grave, who demanded sanity trials accusing the radio of hyp notism &amp were left with their insanity &amp their hands &amp a hung jury, who threw potato salad at CCNY lecturers on Dadaism and subsequently presented themselves on the granite steps of the madhouse with shaven heads and harlequin speech of suicide, demanding in- stantaneous lobotomy, and who were given instead the concrete void of insulin Metrazol electricity hydrotherapy psycho- therapy occupational therapy pingpong &amp amnesia, who in humorless protest overturned only one symbolic pingpong table, resting briefly in catatonia, returning years later truly bald except for a wig of blood, and tears and fingers, to the visible mad man doom of the wards of the madtowns of the East, Pilgrim State's Rockland's and Greystone's foetid halls, bickering with the echoes of the soul, rock- ing and rolling in the midnight solitude-bench dolmen-realms of love, dream of life a night- mare, bodies turned to stone as heavy as the moon, with mother finally ******, and the last fantastic book flung out of the tenement window, and the last door closed at . A.M. and the last telephone slammed at the wall in reply and the last fur- nished room emptied down to the last piece of mental furniture, a yellow paper rose twisted on a wire hanger in the closet, and even that imaginary, nothing but a hopeful little bit of hallucination ah, Carl, while you are not safe I am not safe, and now you're really in the total animal soup of time and who therefore ran through the icy streets obsessed with a sudden flash of the alchemy of the use of the ellipse the catalog the meter &amp the vibrat- ing plane, who dreamt and made incarnate gaps in Time &amp Space through images juxtaposed, and trapped the archangel of the soul between  visual images and joined the elemental verbs and set the noun and dash of consciousness together jumping with sensation of Pater Omnipotens Aeterna Deus to recreate the syntax and measure of poor human prose and stand before you speechless and intel- ligent and shaking with shame, rejected yet con- fessing out the soul to conform to the rhythm of thought in his naked and endless head, the madman bum and angel beat in Time, unknown, yet putting down here what might be left to say in time come after death, and rose reincarnate in the ghostly clothes of jazz in the goldhorn shadow of the band and blew the suffering of America's naked mind for love into an eli eli lamma lamma sabacthani saxophone cry that shivered the cities down to the last radio with the absolute heart of the poem of life butchered out of their own bodies good to eat a thousand years. II What sphinx of cement and aluminum bashed open their skulls and ate up their brains and imagi- nation? Moloch! Solitude! Filth! Ugliness! Ashcans and unob tainable dollars! Children screaming under the stairways! Boys sobbing in armies! Old men weeping in the parks! Moloch! Moloch! Nightmare of Moloch! Moloch the loveless! Mental Moloch! Moloch the heavy judger of men! Moloch the incomprehensible prison! Moloch the crossbone soulless jailhouse and Congress of sorrows! Moloch whose buildings are judgment! Moloch the vast stone of war! Moloch the stun- ned governments! Moloch whose mind is pure machinery! Moloch whose blood is running money! Moloch whose fingers are ten armies! Moloch whose breast is a canni- bal dynamo! Moloch whose ear is a smoking tomb! Moloch whose eyes are a thousand blind windows! Moloch whose skyscrapers stand in the long streets like endless Jehovahs! Moloch whose fac- tories dream and croak in the fog! Moloch whose smokestacks and antennae crown the cities! Moloch whose love is endless oil and stone! Moloch whose soul is electricity and banks! Moloch whose poverty is the specter of genius! Moloch whose fate is a cloud of sexless hydrogen! Moloch whose name is the Mind! Moloch in whom I sit lonely! Moloch in whom I dream Angels! Crazy in Moloch! Cocksucker in Moloch! Lacklove and manless in Moloch! Moloch who entered my soul early! Moloch in whom I am a consciousness without a body! Moloch who frightened me out of my natural ecstasy! Moloch whom I abandon! Wake up in Moloch! Light streaming out of the sky! Moloch! Moloch! Robot apartments! invisible suburbs! skeleton treasuries! blind capitals! demonic industries! spectral nations! invincible mad houses! granite cocks! monstrous bombs! They broke their backs lifting Moloch to Heaven! Pave- ments, trees, radios, tons! lifting the city to Heaven which exists and is everywhere about us! Visions! omens! hallucinations! miracles! ecstasies! gone down the American river! Dreams! adorations! illuminations! religions! the whole boatload of sensitive bullshit! Breakthroughs! over the river! flips and crucifixions! gone down the flood! Highs! Epiphanies! De- spairs! Ten years' animal screams and suicides! Minds! New loves! Mad generation! down on the rocks of Time! Real holy laughter in the river! They saw it all! the wild eyes! the holy yells! They bade farewell! They jumped off the roof! to solitude! waving! carrying flowers! Down to the river! into the street! III Carl Solomon! I'm with you in Rockland where you're madder than I am I'm with you in Rockland where you must feel very strange I'm with you in Rockland where you imitate the shade of my mother I'm with you in Rockland where you've murdered your twelve secretaries I'm with you in Rockland where you laugh at this invisible humor I'm with you in Rockland where we are great writers on the same dreadful typewriter I'm with you in Rockland where your condition has become serious and is reported on the radio I'm with you in Rockland where the faculties of the skull no longer admit the worms of the senses I'm with you in Rockland where you drink the tea of the breasts of the spinsters of Utica I'm with you in Rockland where you pun on the bodies of your nurses the harpies of the Bronx I'm with you in Rockland where you scream in a straightjacket that you're losing the game of the actual pingpong of the abyss I'm with you in Rockland where you bang on the catatonic piano the soul is innocent and immortal it should never die ungodly in an armed madhouse I'm with you in Rockland where fifty more shocks will never return your soul to its body again from its pilgrimage to a cross in the void I'm with you in Rockland where you accuse your doctors of insanity and plot the Hebrew socialist revolution against the fascist national Golgotha I'm with you in Rockland where you will split the heavens of Long Island and resurrect your living human Jesus from the superhuman tomb I'm with you in Rockland where there are twenty-five-thousand mad com- rades all together singing the final stanzas of the Internationale I'm with you in Rockland where we hug and kiss the United States under our bedsheets the United States that coughs all night and won't let us sleep I'm with you in Rockland where we wake up electrified out of the coma by our own souls' airplanes roaring over the roof they've come to drop angelic bombs the hospital illuminates itself imaginary walls col- lapse O skinny legions run outside O starry spangled shock of mercy the eternal war is here O victory forget your underwear we're free I'm with you in Rockland in my dreams you walk dripping from a sea- journey on the highway across America in tears to the door of my cottage in the Western night - San Francisco - Footnote to Howl Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! The world is holy! The soul is holy! The skin is holy! The nose is holy! The tongue and cock and hand and asshole holy! Everything is holy! everybody's holy! everywhere is holy! everyday is in eternity! Everyman's an angel! The bum's as holy as the seraphim! the madman is holy as you my soul are holy! The typewriter is holy the poem is holy the voice is holy the hearers are holy the ecstasy is holy! Holy Peter holy Allen holy Solomon holy Lucien holy Kerouac holy Huncke holy Burroughs holy Cas- sady holy the unknown buggered and suffering beggars holy the hideous human angels! Holy my mother in the insane asylum! Holy the cocks of the grandfathers of Kansas! Holy the groaning saxophone! Holy the bop apocalypse! Holy the jazzbands marijuana hipsters peace &amp junk &amp drums! Holy the solitudes of skyscrapers and pavements! Holy the cafeterias filled with the millions! Holy the mysterious rivers of tears under the streets! Holy the lone juggernaut! Holy the vast lamb of the middle class! Holy the crazy shepherds of rebell- ion! Who digs Los Angeles IS Los Angeles! Holy New York Holy San Francisco Holy Peoria &amp Seattle Holy Paris Holy Tangiers Holy Moscow Holy Istanbul! Holy time in eternity holy eternity in time holy the clocks in space holy the fourth dimension holy the fifth International holy the Angel in Moloch! Holy the sea holy the desert holy the railroad holy the locomotive holy the visions holy the hallucina- tions holy the miracles holy the eyeball holy the abyss! Holy forgiveness! mercy! charity! faith! Holy! Ours! bodies! suffering! magnanimity! Holy the supernatural extra brilliant intelligent kindness of the soul! - Berkeley, I walked on the banks of the tincan banana dock and sat down under the huge shade of a Southern Pacific locomotive to look for the sunset over the box house hills and cry. Jack Kerouac sat beside me on a busted rusty iron pole, companion, we thought the same thoughts of the soul, bleak and blue and sad-eyed, surrounded by the gnarled steel roots of trees of machinery. The only water on the river mirrored the red sky, sun sank on top of final Frisco peaks, no fish in that stream, no hermit in those mounts, just ourselves rheumy-eyed and hung-over like old bums on the riverbank, tired and wily. Look at the Sunflower, he said, there was a dead gray shadow against the sky, big as a man, sitting dry on top of a pile of ancient sawdust-- --I rushed up enchanted--it was my first sunflower, memories of Blake--my visions--Harlem and Hells of the Eastern rivers, bridges clanking Joes greasy Sandwiches, dead baby carriages, black treadless tires forgotten and unretreaded, the poem of the riverbank, condoms &amp pots, steel knives, nothing stainless, only the dank muck and the razor-sharp artifacts passing into the past-- and the gray Sunflower poised against the sunset, crackly bleak and dusty with the smut and smog and smoke of olden locomotives in its eye-- corolla of bleary spikes pushed down and broken like a battered crown, seeds fallen out of its face, soon-to-be-toothless mouth of sunny air, sunrays obliterated on its hairy head like a dried wire spiderweb, leaves stuck out like arms out of the stem, gestures from the sawdust root, broke pieces of plaster fallen out of the black twigs, a dead fly in its ear, Unholy battered old thing you were, my sunflower O my soul, I loved you then! The grime was no man's grime but death and human locomotives, all that dress of dust, that veil of darkened railroad skin, that smog of cheek, that eyelid of black mis'ry, that sooty hand or phallus or protuberance of artificial worse-than-dirt--industrial-- modern--all that civilization spotting your crazy golden crown-- and those blear thoughts of death and dusty loveless eyes and ends and withered roots below, in the home-pile of sand and sawdust, rubber dollar bills, skin of machinery, the guts and innards of the weeping coughing car, the empty lonely tincans with their rusty tongues alack, what more could I name, the smoked ashes of some cock cigar, the cunts of wheelbarrows and the milky breasts of cars, wornout asses out of chairs &amp sphincters of dynamos--all these entangled in your mummied roots--and you standing before me in the sunset, all your glory in your form! A perfect beauty of a sunflower! a perfect excellent lovely sunflower existence! a sweet natural eye to the new hip moon, woke up alive and excited grasping in the sunset shadow sunrise golden monthly breeze! How many flies buzzed round you innocent of your grime, while you cursed the heavens of your railroad and your flower soul? Poor dead flower? when did you forget you were a flower? when did you look at your skin and decide you were an impotent dirty old locomotive? the ghost of a locomotive? the specter and shade of a once powerful mad American locomotive? You were never no locomotive, Sunflower, you were a sunflower! And you Locomotive, you are a locomotive, forget me not! So I grabbed up the skeleton thick sunflower and stuck it at my side like a scepter, and deliver my sermon to my soul, and Jack's soul too, and anyone who'll listen, --We're not our skin of grime, we're not our dread bleak dusty imageless locomotive, we're all golden sunflowers inside, blessed by our own seed &amp hairy naked accomplishment-bodies growing into mad black formal sunflowers in the sunset, spied on by our eyes under the shadow of the mad locomotive riverbank sunset Frisco hilly tincan evening sitdown vision. () Take my love, it is not true, So let it tempt no body new Take my lady, she will sigh For my bed where'er I lie Take them, said the skeleton, But leave my bones alone. Take my raiment, now grown cold, To give to some poor poet old Take the skin that hoods this truth If his age would wear my youth Take them, said the skeleton, But leave my bones alone. Take the thoughts that like the wind Blow my body out of mind Take this heart to go with that And pass it on from rat to rat Take them, said the skeleton, But leave my bones alone. Take the art which I bemoan In a poem's crazy tone Grind me down, though I may groan, To the starkest stick and stone Take them, said the skeleton, But leave my bones alone. - Early What thoughts I have of you tonight, Walt Whit- man, for I walked down the sidestreets under the trees with a headache self-conscious looking at the full moon. In my hungry fatigue, and shopping for images, I went into the neon fruit supermarket, dreaming of your enumerations! What peaches and what penumbras! Whole fam- ilies shopping at night! Aisles full of husbands! Wives in the avocados, babies in the tomatoes!--and you, Garcia Lorca, what were you doing down by the watermelons? I saw you, Walt Whitman, childless, lonely old grubber, poking among the meats in the refrigerator and eyeing the grocery boys. I heard you asking questions of each: Who killed the pork chops? What price bananas? Are you my Angel? I wandered in and out of the brilliant stacks of cans following you, and followed in my imagination by the store detective. We strode down the open corridors together in our solitary fancy tasting artichokes, possessing every frozen delicacy, and never passing the cashier. Where are we going, Walt Whitman? The doors close in an hour. Which way does your beard point tonight? (I touch your book and dream of our odyssey in the supermarket and feel absurd.) Will we walk all night through solitary streets? The trees add shade to shade, lights out in the houses, we'll both be lonely. Will we stroll dreaming ofthe lost America of love past blue automobiles in driveways, home to our silent cottage? Ah, dear father, graybeard, lonely old courage- teacher, what America did you have when Charon quit poling his ferry and you got out on a smoking bank and stood watching the boat disappear on the black waters of Lethe? - Berkeley, railroad yard in San Jose I wandered desolate in front of a tank factory and sat on a bench near the switchman's shack. A flower lay on the hay on the asphalt highway --the dread hay flower I thought--It had a brittle black stem and corolla of yellowish dirty spikes like Jesus' inchlong crown, and a soiled dry center cotton tuft like a used shaving brush that's been lying under the garage for a year. Yellow, yellow flower, and flower of industry, tough spiky ugly flower, flower nonetheless, with the form of the great yellow Rose in your brain! This is the flower of the World. - San Jose, - for Naomi Ginsberg, - I Strange now to think of you, gone without corsets &amp eyes, while I walk on the sunny pavement of Greenwhich Village. downtown Manhattan, clear winter noon, and I've been up all night, talking, talking, reading the Kaddish aloud, listening to Ray Charles blues should blind on the phonograph the rhythm the rhythm - and your memory in my head three years after - And read Adonais' last triumphant stanzas aloud - wept, realizing how we suffer - And how Death is that remedy all singers dream of, sing, remember prophesy as in the Hebrew Anthem, or the Buddhist Book of Answers - and my own imagination of a withered leaf - at dawn - Dreaming back thru life, Your time - and mine accelerating toward Apocalypse, the final moment - the flower burning in the Day - and what comes after, looking back on the mind itself that saw an American city a flash away, and a great dream of Me or China, or you and a phantom Russia, or a crumpled bed that never existed - like a poem in the dark - escaped back to Oblivion - No more to say, and nothing to weep for but the Beings in the Dream, trapped in its disappearance, sighing, screaming with it, buying and selling pieces of phantom, worshipping each other, worshipping the God included in it all - longing or inevitability? - while it lasts, a Vision - anything more? It leaps about me, as I go out and walk the street, look back over my shoulder, Seventh Avenue, the battlements of window office buildings shouldering each other high, under a cloud, tall as the sky an instant - and the sky above - an old blue place. or down the Avenue to the south - as I walk toward the Lower East Side - where you walked  years ago, little girl - from Russian, eating the first poisonous tomatoes of America - frightened at the dock - then struggling in the crowds of Orchard Street toward what? - toward Newark - toward candy store, first home-made sodas of our century, hand-churned ice cream in backroom on musty brownfloor boards - Toward education marriage nervous breakdown, operation, teaching school, and learning to be mad, in a dream - what is this life? Toward the Key in the window - and the great Key lays its head of light on top of Manhattan, and over the floor, and lays down on the sidewalk - in a single vast beam, moving, as I walk down First toward the Yiddish Theater - and the place of poverty you knew, and I know, but without caring now - Strange to have moved thru Paterson, and the West, and Europe and here again, with the cries of Spaniards now in the doorstoops doors and dark boys on the street, fire escapes old as you - Tho, you're not old now, that's left here with me - Myself, anyhow, maybe as old as the universe - and I guess that dies with us - enough to cancel all that comes - What came is gone forever every time - That's good! That leaves it open for no regret - no fear radiators, lacklove, torture even toothache in the end - Though while it comes it is a lion that eats the soul - and the lamb, the soul, in us, alas, offering itself in sacrifice to change's fierce hunger - hair and teeth - and the roar of bonepain, skull bare, break rib, rot-skin, braintricked Implacability. Ai! ai! we do worse! We are in a fix! And you're out, Death let you out, Death had the Mercy, you're done with your century, done with God, done with the path thru it - Done with yourself at last - Pure - Back to the Babe dark before your Father, before us all - befpre the world - There, rest. No more suffering for you. I know where you've gone, it's good. No more flowers in the summer fields of New York, no joy now, no more fear of Louis, and no more of his sweetness and glasses, his high school decades, debts, loves, frightened telephone calls, conception beds, relatives, hands - No more of sister Elanor, - she gone before you - we kept it secret - you killed her - or she killed herself to bear with you - an arthritic heart - But Death's killed you both - No matter - Nor your memory of your mother,  tears in silent movies weeks and weeks - forgetting, agrieve watching Marie Dressler address humanity, Chaplin dance in youth, or Boris Godunov, Chaliapin's at the Met, halling his voice is a weeping Czar - by standing room with Elanor &amp Max - watching also teh Capitalists take seats in Orchestra, white furs, diamonds, with the YPSL's hitch-hiking thru Pennsylvania, in black baggy gym skirts pants, photograph of  girls holding each other round the waste, and laughing eye, too coy, virginal solitude of all girls grown old, or dead, now, and that long hair in the grave - lucky to have husbands later - You made it - I came too - Eugene my brother before (still grieving now and will gream on to his last stiff hand, as he goes thru his cancer - or kill - later perhaps - soon he will think - ) And it's the last moment I remember, which I see them all, thru myself, now - tho not you I didn't foresee what you felt - what more hideous gape of bad mouth came first - to you - and were you prepared? To go where? In that Dark - that - in that God? a radiance? A Lord in the Void? Like an eye in the black cloud in a dream? Adonoi at last, with you? Beyond my remembrance! Incapable to guess! Not merely the yellow skull in the grave, or box of worm dust, and a stained ribbon - Deaths- head with Halo? can you believe it? Is it only the sun that shines once for the mind, only the flash of existence, than none ever was? Nothing beyond what we have - what you had - that so pitiful - yet Triumph, to have been here, and changed, like a tree, broken, or flower - fed to the ground - but mad, with its petals, colored, thinking Great Universe, shaken, cut in the head, leaf stript, hid in an egg crate hospital, cloth wrapped, sore - freaked in the moon brain, Naughtless. No flower like that flowerm which knew itself in the garden, and fought the knife - lost Cut down by an idiot Snowman's icy - even in the Spring - strange ghost thought - some Death - Sharp icicle in his hand - crowned with old roses - a dog for his eyes - cock of a sweatshop - heart of electric irons. All the accumulations of life, that wear us out - clocks, bodies, consciousness, shoes, breasts - begotten sons - your Communism - 'Paranoia' into hospitals. You once kicked Elanor in the leg, she died of heart failure later. You of stroke. Asleep? within a year, the two of you, sisters in death. Is Elanor happy? Max grieves alive in an office on Lower Broadway, lone large mustache over midnight Accountings, not sure. His life passes - as he sees - and what does he doubt now? Still dream of making money, or that might have made money, hired nurse, had children, found even your Immortality, Naomi? I'll see him soon. Now I've got to cut through - to talk to you - as I didn't when you had a mouth. Forever. And we're bound for that, Forever - like Emily Dickinson's horses - headed to the End. They know the way - These Steeds - run faster than we think - it's our own life they cross - and take with them. Magnificent, mourned no more, marred of heart, mind behind, married dreamed, mortal changed - Ass and face done with murder. In the world, given, flower maddened, made no Utopia, shut under pine, almed in Earth, balmed in Lone, Jehovah, accept. Nameless, One Faced, Forever beyond me, beginningless, endless, Father in death. Tho I am not there for this Prophecy, I am unmarried, I'm Hymnless, I'm Heavenless, headless in blisshood I would still adore Thee, Heaven, after Death, only One blessed in Nothingness, not light or darkness, Dayless Eternity - Take this, this Psalm, from me, burst from my hand in a day, some of my Time, now given to Nothing - to praise Thee - But Death This is the end, the redemption from Wilderness, way for the Wonderer, House sought for All, black handkerchief washed clean by weeping - page beyond Psalm - Last change of mine and Naomi - to God's perfect Darkness - Death, stay thy phantoms! Paris, December  - New York, At gauzy dusk, thin haze like cigarette smoke ribbons past Chrysler Building's silver fins tapering delicately needletopped, Empire State's taller antenna filmed milky lit amid blocks black and white apartmenting veil'd sky over Manhattan, offices new built dark glassed in blueish heaven--The East 's &amp 's covered with castles &amp watertowers, seven storied tar-topped house-banks over York Avenue, late may-green trees surrounding Rockefellers' blue domed medical arbor-- Geodesic science at the waters edge--Cars running up East River Drive, &amp parked at N.Y. Hospital's oval door where perfect tulips flower the health of a thousand sick souls trembling inside hospital rooms. Triboro bridge steel-spiked penthouse orange roofs, sunset tinges the river and in a few Bronx windows, some magnesium vapor brilliances're spotted five floors above E th St under grey painted bridge trestles. Way downstream along the river, as Monet saw Thames years ago, Con Edison smokestacks th street, &amp Brooklyn Bridge's skeined dim in modern mists-- Pipes sticking up to sky nine smokestacks huge visible-- U.N. Building hangs under an orange crane, &amp red lights on vertical avenues below the trees turn green at the nod of a skull with a mild nerve ache. Dim dharma, I return to this spectacle after weeks of poisoned lassitude, my thighs belly chest &amp arms covered with poxied welts, head pains fading back of the neck, right eyebrow cheek mouth paralyzed--from taking the wrong medicine, sweated too much in the forehead helpless, covered my rage from gorge to prostate with grinding jaw and tightening anus not released the weeping scream of horror at robot Mayaguez World self ton billions metal grief unloaded Pnom Penh to Nakon Thanom, Santiago &amp Tehran. Fresh warm breeze in the window, day's release &gtfrom pain, cars float downside the bridge trestle and uncounted building-wall windows multiplied a mile deep into ash-delicate sky beguile my empty mind. A seagull passes alone wings spread silent over roofs. - May ,  Mayaguez Crisis Blandly mother takes him strolling by railroad and by river -he's the son of the absconded hot rod angel- and he imagines cars and rides them in his dreams, so lonely growing up among the imaginary automobiles and dead souls of Tarrytown to create out of his own imagination the beauty of his wild forebears-a mythology he cannot inherit. Will he later hallucinate his gods? Waking among mysteries with an insane gleam of recollection? The recognition- something so rare in his soul, met only in dreams -nostalgias of another life. A question of the soul. And the injured losing their injury in their innocence -a cock, a cross, an excellence of love. And the father grieves in flophouse complexities of memory a thousand miles away, unknowing of the unexpected youthful stranger bumming toward his door. - New York, April , a lot of mouths and cocks, under the world there's a lot of come, and a lot of saliva dripping into brooks, There's a lot of Shit under the world, flowing beneath cities into rivers, a lot of urine floating under the world, a lot of snot in the world's industrial nostrils, sweat under world's iron arm, blood gushing out of the world's breast, endless lakes of tears, seas of sick vomit rushing between the hemispheres floating towards Sargasso, old oily rags and brake fluids, human gasoline-- Under the world there's pain, fractured thighs, napalm burning in black hair, phosphorus eating elbows to bone insectiside contaminating oceantide, plastic dolls floating across Atlantic, Toy soldiers crowding the Pacific, B- bombers choking jungle air with vaportrails and brilliant flares Robot drones careening over rice terraces dropping cluster grenades, plastic pellets spray into flesh, dragontooth mines &amp jellied fires fall on straw roofs and water buffalos, perforating village huts with barbed shrapnel, trenchpits filled with fuel-gas-poisen'd explosive powders-- Under the world there's broken skulls, crushed feet, cut eyeballs, severed fingers, slashed jaws, Dysentry, homeless millions, tortured hearts, empty souls. April Oil brown smog over Denver Oil red dung colored smoke level to level across the horizon blue tainted sky above Oil car smog gasoline hazing red Denver's day December bare trees sticking up from housetop streets Plane lands rumbling, planes rise over radar wheels, black smoke drifts from tailfins Oil millions of cars speeding the cracked plains Oil from Texas, Bahrein, Venezuela Mexico Oil that turns General Motors revs up Ford lights up General Electric, oil that crackles thru International Business Machine computers, charges dynamos for ITT sparks Western Electric runs thru Amer Telephone &amp Telegraph wires Oil that flows thru Exxon New Jersey hoses, rings in Mobil gas tank cranks, rumbles Chrysler engines shoots thru Texaco pipelines blackens ocean from broken Gulf tankers spills onto Santa Barbara beaches from Standard of California derricks offshore. Dec , I Whom bomb? We bomb'd them! Whom bomb? We bomb'd them! Whom bomb? We bomb'd them! Whom bomb? We bomb'd them! Whom bomb? We bomb you! Whom bomb? We bomb you! Whom bomb? You bomb you! Whom bomb? You bomb you! What do we do? Who do we bomb? What do we do? Who do we bomb? What do we do? Who do we bomb? What do we do? Who do we bomb? What do we do? You bomb! You bomb them! What do we do? You bomb! You bomb them! What do we do? We bomb! We bomb you! What do we do? You bomb! You bomb you! Whom bomb? We bomb you! Whom bomb? We bomb you! Whom bomb? You bomb you! Whom bomb? You bomb you! - May II - For Don Cherry Whydja bomb? We didn't wanna bomb! Whydja bomb? We didn't wanna bomb! Whydja bomb? You didn't wanna bomb! Whydja bomb? You didn't wanna bomb! Who said bomb? Who said we hadda bomb? Who said bomb? Who said we hadda bomb? Who said bomb? Who said you hadda bomb? Who said bomb? Who said you hadda bomb? Who wantsa bomb? We don't wanna bomb! Who wantsa bomb? We don't wanna bomb! Who wantsa bomb? We don't wanna bomb! We don't wanna we don't wanna we don't wanna bomb! Who wanteda bomb? Somebody musta wanteda bomb! Who wanteda bomb? Somebody musta wanteda bomb! Who wanteda bomb? Somebody musta wanteda bomb! Who wanteda bomb? Somebody musta wanteda bomb! They wanteda bomb! They neededa bomb! They wanteda bomb! They neededa bomb! They wanteda bomb! They neededa bomb! They wanteda bomb! They neededa bomb! They thought they hadda bomb! They thought they hadda bomb! They thought they hadda bomb! They thought they hadda bomb! Saddam said he hadda bomb! Bush said he better bomb! Saddam said he hadda bomb! Bush said he better bomb! Saddam said he hadda bomb! Bush said he better bomb! Saddam said he hadda bomb! Bush said he better bomb! Whatdid he say he better bomb for? Whatdid he say he better bomb for? Whatdid he say he better bomb for? Whatdid he say he better bomb for? Hadda get ridda Saddam with a bomb! Hadda get ridda Saddam with a bomb! Hadda get ridda Saddam with a bomb! Hadda get ridda Saddam with a bomb! Saddam's still there building a bomb! Saddam's still there building a bomb! Saddam's still there building a bomb! Saddam's still there building a bomb! III Armageddon did the job Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Armageddon did the job Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Armageddon does the job Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Armageddon does the job Armageddon for the mob Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Armageddon for the mob Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog &amp Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Gog Magog Ginsberg says Gog &amp Magog Armageddon did the job. - February - June Dylan is about the Individual against the whole creation Beethoven is about one man's fist in the lightning clouds The Pope is about abortion &amp the spirits of the dead... Television is about people sitting in their living room looking at their things America is about being a big Country full of Cowboys Indians Jews Negroes &amp Americans Orientals Chicanos Factories skyscrapers Niagara Falls Steel Mills radios homeless Conservatives, don't forget Russia is about Czars Stalin Poetry Secret Police Communism barefoot in the snow But that's not really Russia it's a concept A concept is about how to look at the earth from the moon without ever getting there. The moon is about love &amp Werewolves, also Poe Poe is about looking at the moon from the sun or else the graveyard Everything is about something if you're a thin movie producer chain-smoking muggles The world is about overpopulation, Imperial invasions, Biocide Genocide, Fratricidal Wars, Starvation, Holocaust, mass injury &amp murder, high technology Super science, atom Nuclear Neutron Hydrogen detritus, Radiation Compassion Buddha, Alchemy Communication is about monopoly telivision radio movie newspaper spin on Earth, i.e. planetary censorship. Universe is about Universe. Allen Ginsberg is about confused mind writing down newspaper headlines from Mars - The audience is about salvation, the listeners are aBOUT SEX, Spiritual gymnastics, nostalgia for the Steam Engine &amp Pony Express Hitler Stalin Roosevelt &amp Churchill are about arithmetic &amp Quadrilateral equations, above all chemistry physics &amp chaos theory - Who cares what it's all about? I do! Edgar Allen Poe cares! Shelly cares! Beethoven &amp Dylan care. Do you care? What are you about or are you a human being with  fingers and two eyes? - I In the depths of the Greyhound Terminal sitting dumbly on a baggage truck looking at the sky waiting for the Los Angeles Express to depart worrying about eternity over the Post Office roof in the night-time red downtown heaven staring through my eyeglasses I realized shuddering these thoughts were not eternity, nor the poverty of our lives, irritable baggage clerks, nor the millions of weeping relatives surrounding the buses waving goodbye, nor other millions of the poor rushing around from city to city to see their loved ones, nor an indian dead with fright talking to a huge cop by the Coke machine, nor this trembling old lady with a cane taking the last trip of her life, nor the red-capped cynical porter collecting his quar- ters and smiling over the smashed baggage, nor me looking around at the horrible dream, nor mustached negro Operating Clerk named Spade, dealing out with his marvelous long hand the fate of thousands of express packages, nor fairy Sam in the basement limping from leaden trunk to trunk, nor Joe at the counter with his nervous breakdown smiling cowardly at the customers, nor the grayish-green whale's stomach interior loft where we keep the baggage in hideous racks, hundreds of suitcases full of tragedy rocking back and forth waiting to be opened, nor the baggage that's lost, nor damaged handles, nameplates vanished, busted wires &amp broken ropes, whole trunks exploding on the concrete floor, nor seabags emptied into the night in the final warehouse. II Yet Spade reminded me of Angel, unloading a bus, dressed in blue overalls black face official Angel's work- man cap, pushing with his belly a huge tin horse piled high with black baggage, looking up as he passed the yellow light bulb of the loft and holding high on his arm an iron shepherd's crook. III It was the racks, I realized, sitting myself on top of them now as is my wont at lunchtime to rest my tired foot, it was the racks, great wooden shelves and stanchions posts and beams assembled floor to roof jumbled with baggage, -the Japanese white metal postwar trunk gaudily flowered &amp headed for Fort Bragg, one Mexican green paper package in purple rope adorned with names for Nogales, hundreds of radiators all at once for Eureka, crates of Hawaiian underwear, rolls of posters scattered over the Peninsula, nuts to Sacramento, one human eye for Napa, an aluminum box of human blood for Stockton and a little red package of teeth for Calistoga- it was the racks and these on the racks I saw naked in electric light the night before I quit, the racks were created to hang our possessions, to keep us together, a temporary shift in space, God's only way of building the rickety structure of Time, to hold the bags to send on the roads, to carry our luggage from place to place looking for a bus to ride us back home to Eternity where the heart was left and farewell tears began. IV A swarm of baggage sitting by the counter as the trans- continental bus pulls in. The clock registering : A.M., May , , the second hand moving forward, red. Getting ready to load my last bus.-Farewell, Walnut Creek Richmond Vallejo Portland Pacific Highway Fleet-footed Quicksilver, God of transience. One last package sits lone at midnight sticking up out of the Coast rack high as the dusty fluorescent light. The wage they pay us is too low to live on. Tragedy reduced to numbers. This for the poor shepherds. I am a communist. Farewell ye Greyhound where I suffered so much, hurt my knee and scraped my hand and built my pectoral muscles big as a vagina. - May , Reality is a question of realizing how real the world is already. Time is Eternity, ultimate and immovable everyone's an angel. It's Heaven's mystery of changing perfection : absolute Eternity changes! Cars are always going down the street, lamps go off and on. It's a great flat plain we can see everything on top of a table. Clams open on the table, lambs are eaten by worms on the plain. The motion of change is beautiful, as well as form called in and out of being. Next : to distinguish process in its particularity with an eye to the initiation of gratifying new changes desired in the real world. Here we're overwhelmed with such unpleasant detail we dream again of Heaven. For the world is a mountain of shit : if it's going to be moved at all, it's got to be taken by handfuls. Man lives like the unhappy whore on River Street who in her Eternity gets only a couple of bucks and a lot of snide remarks in return for seeking physical love the best way she knows how, never really heard of a glad job or joyous marriage or a difference in the heart : or thinks it isn't for her, which is her worst misery. Paterson, Spring America I've given you all and now I'm nothing. America two dollars and twentyseven cents January , . I can't stand my own mind. America when will we end the human war? Go fuck yourself with your atom bomb. I don't feel good don't bother me. I won't write my poem till I'm in my right mind. America when will you be angelic? When will you take off your clothes? When will you look at yourself through the grave? When will you be worthy of your million Trotskyites? America why are your libraries full of tears? America when will you send your eggs to India? I'm sick of your insane demands. When can I go into the supermarket and buy what I need with my good looks? America after all it is you and I who are perfect not the next world. Your machinery is too much for me. You made me want to be a saint. There must be some other way to settle this argument. Burroughs is in Tangiers I don't think he'll come back it's sinister. Are you being sinister or is this some form of practical joke? I'm trying to come to the point. I refuse to give up my obsession. America stop pushing I know what I'm doing. America the plum blossoms are falling. I haven't read the newspapers for months, everyday somebody goes on trial for murder. America I feel sentimental about the Wobblies. America I used to be a communist when I was a kid I'm not sorry. I smoke marijuana every chance I get. I sit in my house for days on end and stare at the roses in the closet. When I go to Chinatown I get drunk and never get laid. My mind is made up there's going to be trouble. You should have seen me reading Marx. My psychoanalyst thinks I'm perfectly right. I won't say the Lord's Prayer. I have mystical visions and cosmic vibrations. America I still haven't told you what you did to Uncle Max after he came over from Russia. I'm addressing you. Are you going to let your emotional life be run by Time Magazine? I'm obsessed by Time Magazine. I read it every week. Its cover stares at me every time I slink past the corner candystore. I read it in the basement of the Berkeley Public Library. It's always telling me about responsibility. Business- men are serious. Movie producers are serious. Everybody's serious but me. It occurs to me that I am America. I am talking to myself again. Asia is rising against me. I haven't got a chinaman's chance. I'd better consider my national resources. My national resources consist of two joints of marijuana millions of genitals an unpublishable private literature that goes  miles an hour and twenty-five-thousand mental institutions. I say nothing about my prisons nor the millions of underprivileged who live in my flowerpots under the light of five hundred suns. I have abolished the whorehouses of France, Tangiers is the next to go. My ambition is to be President despite the fact that I'm a Catholic. America how can I write a holy litany in your silly mood? I will continue like Henry Ford my strophes are as individual as his automobiles more so they're all different sexes. America I will sell you strophes $ apiece $ down on your old strophe America free Tom Mooney America save the Spanish Loyalists America Sacco &amp Vanzetti must not die America I am the Scottsboro boys. America when I was seven momma took me to Com- munist Cell meetings they sold us garbanzos a handful per ticket a ticket costs a nickel and the speeches were free everybody was angelic and sentimental about the workers it was all so sin- cere you have no idea what a good thing the party was in  Scott Nearing was a grand old man a real mensch Mother Bloor made me cry I once saw Israel Amter plain. Everybody must have been a spy. America you don't really want to go to war. America it's them bad Russians. Them Russians them Russians and them Chinamen. And them Russians. The Russia wants to eat us alive. The Russia's power mad. She wants to take our cars from out our garages. Her wants to grab Chicago. Her needs a Red Readers' Digest. Her wants our auto plants in Siberia. Him big bureaucracy running our fillingsta- tions. That no good. Ugh. Him make Indians learn read. Him need big black niggers. Hah. Her make us all work sixteen hours a day. Help. America this is quite serious. America this is the impression I get from looking in the television set. America is this correct? I'd better get right down to the job. It's true I don't want to join the Army or turn lathes in precision parts factories, I'm nearsighted and psychopathic anyway. America I'm putting my queer shoulder to the wheel. - Berkeley, January , Real as a dream What shall I do with this great opportunity to fly? What is the interpretation of this planet, this moon? if I can dream that I dream / and dream anything dreamable / can I dream I am awake / and why do that? When I dream in a dream that I wake / up what happens when I try to move? I dream that I move and the effort moves and moves till I move / and my arm hurts Then I wake up / dismayed / I was dreaming / I was waking when I was dreaming still / just now. and try to remember next time in dreams that I am in dreaming. And dream anything I want when I'm awaken. When I'm in awakeness what do I desire? I desire to fulfill my emotional belly. My whole body my heart in my fingertops thrill with some old fulfillments. Pages of celestial rhymes burning fire-words unconsumable but disappear. Arcane parchments my own and the universe the answer. Belly to Belly and knee to knee. The hot spurt of my body to thee and thee old boy / dreamy Earl / you Prince of Paterson / now king of me / lost Haledon first dream that made me take down my pants urgently to show the cars / auto tracks / rolling down avenue hill. That far back what do I remember / but the face of the leader of the gang was blond / that loved me / one day on the steps of his house blocks away all afternoon I told him about my magic Spell I can do anything I want / palaces millions / chemistry sets / chicken coops / white horses stables and torture basements / I inspect my naked victims chained upside down / my fingertips thrill approval on their thighs white hairless cheeks I may kiss all I want at my mercy. on the racks. I pass with my strong attendants / I am myself naked bending down with my buttocks out for their smacks of reproval / o the heat of desire liek shit in my asshole. The strange gang across the street / thru the grocerystore / in the wood alley / out in the open on the corner Because I lied to the Dentist about that chickencoop roofing / slate stolen off his garage by me and the boy I loved who would punish me if he knew what I loved him. That now I have had that boy back in another blond form Peter Orlovsky a Chinese teenager in Bangkok ten years twenty years Jo Army on the campus / white blond loins / my mouth hath kisses / full of his cock / my ass burning / full of his cock all that I do desire. In dream and awake this handsome body mine / answered all I desired / intimate loves / open eyed / revealed at last / clothes on the floor Underwear the most revealing stripped off below the belly button in bed. That's that / yes yes / the flat cocks the red pricks the gentle public hair / alone with me my magic spell. My power / what I desire alone / what after thirty years / I got forever / after thirty years / satisfied enough with Peter / with all I wanted / with many men I knew one generation / our sperm passing into our mouths and bellies / beautiful when I love / given. Now the dream oldens / I olden / my hair a year long / my thirtyeight birthday approaching. I dream I am bald / am disappearing / the campus unrecognizable / Haledon Avenue will be covered with neon / motels / Supermarkets / iron the porches and woods changed when i go back / to see Earl again He'll be bald / fleshy father / I could pursie him further in the garage If there's still a garage on the hill / on the planet / when I get back. From Asia. If I could even remember his name or his face / or find him / When I was ten / perhaps he exists in some form. With a belly and a belt and an auto Whatever his last name / I never knew / in the phonebook / the Akashic records. I'll write my Inspiration for all Mankind to remember, My Idea, the secret cave / in the clothes closet / that house probably down / Nothing to go back to / everything's gone / only my idea that's disappearing / even in dreams / gray dust piles / instant annihilation of World War II and all its stainless steel shining-mouthed cannons much less me and my grammar school kisses / I never kissed in time / and go on kissing in dream and out on the street / as if it were for ever. No forever left! Even my oldest forever gone, in Bangkok, in Benares, swept up with words and bodies / all into the brown Ganges / passing the burning grounds and / into the police state. My mind, my mind / you had six feet of Earth to hoe / Why didn't you remember and plant the seed of Law and gather the sprouts of What? the golden blossoms of what idea? If I dream that I dream / what dream should I dream next? Motorcycle rickshaws / parting lamp shine / little taxis / horses hoofs on this Saigon midnight street. Angkor Wat ahead and the ruined city's old Hindu faces and there was a dream about Eternity. What should I dream when I wake? What's left to dream, more Chinese meat? More magic Spells? More youths to love before I change &amp disappear? More dream words? For now that I know that I am dreaming / What next for you Allen? Run down to the Presidents Palace full of Morphine / The cocks crowing / in the street / Dawn trucks / What is the question? Do I need sleep, now that there's light in the window? I'll go to sleep. Signing off until / the next idea / the moving van arrives empty at the Doctor's house full of Chinese furniture. - Saigon, May -June, The flower in the glass peanut bottle formerly in the kitchen crooked to take a place in the light, the closet door opened, because I used it before, it kindly stayed open waiting for me, its owner. I began to feel my misery in pallet on floor, listening to music, my misery, that's why I want to sing. The room closed down on me, I expected the presence of the Creator, I saw my gray painted walls and ceiling, they contained my room, they contained me as the sky contained my garden, I opened my door The rambler vine climbed up the cottage post, the leaves in the night still where the day had placed them, the animal heads of the flowers where they had arisen to think at the sun Can I bring back the words? Will thought of transcription haze my mental open eye? The kindly search for growth, the gracious de- sire to exist of the flowers, my near ecstasy at existing among them The privilege to witness my existence--you too must seek the sun . . . My books piled up before me for my use waiting in space where I placed them, they haven't disappeared, time's left its remnants and qual- ities for me to use--my words piled up, my texts, my manuscripts, my loves. I had a moment of clarity, saw the feeling in the heart of things, walked out to the garden crying. Saw the red blossoms in the night light, sun's gone, they had all grown, in a moment, and were wait- ing stopped in time for the day sun to come and give them. . . . Flowers which as in a dream at sunset I watered faithfully not knowing how much I loved them. I am so lonely in my glory--except they too out there--I looked up--those red bush blossoms beckon- ing and peering in the window waiting in blind love, their leaves too have hope and are upturned top flat to the sky to receive--all creation open to receive--the flat earth itself. The music descends, as does the tall bending stalk of the heavy blossom, because it has to, to stay alive, to continue to the last drop of joy. The world knows the love that's in its breast as in the flower, the suffering lonely world. The Father is merciful. The light socket is crudely attached to the ceil- ing, after the house was built, to receive a plug which sticks in it alright, and serves my phonograph now . . . The closet door is open for me, where I left it, since I left it open, it has graciously stayed open. The kitchen has no door, the hole there will admit me should I wish to enter the kitchen. I remember when I first got laid, H.P. gra- ciously took my cherry, I sat on the docks of Prov- incetown, age , joyful, elevated in hope with the Father, the door to the womb was open to admit me if I wished to enter. There are unused electricity plugs all over my house if I ever need them. The kitchen window is open, to admit air... The telephone--sad to relate--sits on the floor--I haven't the money to get it connected-- I want people to bow as they see me and say he is gifted with poetry, he has seen the presence of the Creator. And the Creator gave me a shot of his presence to gratify my wish, so as not to cheat me of my yearning for him. - Berkeley, September , In nineteen hundred forty-nine China was won by Mao Tse-tung Chiang Kai Shek's army ran away They were waiting there in Thailand yesterday Supported by the CIA Pushing junk down Thailand way First they stole from the Meo Tribes Up in the hills they started taking bribes Then they sent their soldiers up to Shan Collecting opium to send to The Man Pushing junk in Bangkok yesterday Supported by the CIA Brought their jam on mule trains down To Chiang Mai that's a railroad town Sold it next to the police chief's brain He took it to town on the choochoo train Trafficking dope to Bangkok all day Supported by the CIA The policeman's name was Mr. Phao He peddled dope grand scale and how Chief of border customs paid By Central Intelligence's U.S. aid The whole operation, Newspapers say Supported by the CIA He got so sloppy and peddled so loose He busted himself and cooked his own goose Took the reward for the opium load Seizing his own haul which same he resold Big time pusher for a decade turned grey Working for the CIA Touby Lyfong he worked for the French A big fat man liked to dine &amp wench Prince of the Meos he grew black mud Till opium flowed through the land like a flood Communists came and chased the French away So Touby took a job with the CIA The whole operation fell in to chaos Till U.S. intelligence came in to Laos Mary Azarian/Matt Wuerker I'll tell you no lie I'm a true American Our big pusher there was Phoumi Nosavan All them Princes in a power play But Phoumi was the man for the CIA And his best friend General Vang Pao Ran the Meo army like a sacred cow Helicopter smugglers filled Long Cheng's bars In Xieng Quang province on the Plain of Jars It started in secret they were fighting yesterday Clandestine secret army of the CIA All through the Sixties the dope flew free Thru Tan Son Nhut Saigon to Marshall Ky Air America followed through Transporting comfiture for President Thieu All these Dealers were decades and yesterday The Indochinese mob of the U.S. CIA Operation Haylift Offisir Wm Colby Saw Marshall Ky fly opium Mr. Mustard told me Indochina desk he was Chief of Dirty Tricks Hitch-hiking with dope pushers was how he got his fix Subsidizing the traffickers to drive the Reds away Till Colby was the head of the CIA -January The weight of the world is love. Under the burden of solitude, under the burden of dissatisfaction the weight, the weight we carry is love. Who can deny? In dreams it touches the body, in thought constructs a miracle, in imagination anguishes till born in human-- looks out of the heart burning with purity-- for the burden of life is love, but we carry the weight wearily, and so must rest in the arms of love at last, must rest in the arms of love. No rest without love, no sleep without dreams of love-- be mad or chill obsessed with angels or machines, the final wish is love --cannot be bitter, cannot deny, cannot withhold if denied: the weight is too heavy --must give for no return as thought is given in solitude in all the excellence of its excess. The warm bodies shine together in the darkness, the hand moves to the center of the flesh, the skin trembles in happiness and the soul comes joyful to the eye-- yes, yes, that's what I wanted, I always wanted, I always wanted, to return to the body where I was born. - San Jose, An Asphodel O dear sweet rosy unattainable desire . . .how sad, no way to change the mad cultivated asphodel, the visible reality. . . and skin's appalling petals--how inspired to be so Iying in the living room drunk naked and dreaming, in the absence of electricity . . . over and over eating the low root of the asphodel, gray fate . . . rolling in generation on the flowery couch as on a bank in Arden-- my only rose tonite's the treat of my own nudity. - Fall, Please master can I touch your cheek please master can I kneel at your feet please master can I loosen your blue pants please master can I gaze at your golden haired belly please master can I gently take down your shorts please master can I have your thighs bare to my eyes please master can I take off your clothes below your chair please master can I kiss your ankles and soul please master can I touch lips to your muscle hairless thigh please master can I lay my ear pressed to your stomach please master can I wrap my arms around your white ass please master can I lick your groin curled with soft blond fur please master can I touch my tongue to your rosy asshole please master may I pass my face to your balls please master, please look into my eyes, please master order me down on the floor, please master tell me to lick your thick shaft please master put your rough hands on my bald hairy skull please master press my mouth to your prick-heart please master press my face into your belly, pull me slowly strong thumbed till your dumb hardness fills my throat to the base till I swallow and taste your delicate flesh-hot prick barrel veined Please Master push my shoulders away and stare into my eye, &amp make me bend over the table please master grab my thighs and lift my ass to your waist please master your rough hand's stroke on my neck your palm down my backside please master push me up, my feet on chairs, till my hole feels the breath of your spit and your thumb stroke please master make me say Please Master Fuck me now Please Master grease my balls and hairmouth with sweet vaselines please master stroke your shaft with white creams please master touch your cock head to my wrinkled self-hole please master push it in gently, your elbows enwrapped around my breast your arms passing down to my belly, my penis you touch w/ your little fingers please master shove it in me a little, a little, a little, please master sink your droor thing down my behind &amp please master make me wiggle my rear to eat up the prick trunk till my asshalfs cuddle your thighs, my back bent over till I'm alone sticking out your sword stuck throbbing in me please master pull out and slowly roll into the bottom please master lunge it again, and withdraw to the tip please please master fuck me again with your self, please fuck me Please Master drive it down till it hurts me the softness the Softness please master make love to my ass, give body to center &amp fuck me for good like a girl, tenderly clasp me please master I take me to thee, &amp drive in my belly your selfsame sweet heat-rood your fingered in solitude Denver or Brooklyn or fucked in a maiden in Paris carlots please master drive me thy vehicle, body of love drops, sweat fuck body of tenderness, Give me your dog fuck faster please master make me go moan on the table Go moan O please master do fuck me like that in your rhythm thrill-plunge and pull-back bounce &amp push down till I loosen my asshole a dog on the table yelping with terror delight to be loved Please master call me a dog, an ass beast, a wet asshole &amp fuck me more violent, my eyes hid with your palms round my skull &amp plunge down in a brutal hard lash thru soft drip-fish &amp throb thru five seconds to spurt out your semen heat over &amp over, bamming it in while I cry out your name I do love you please Master. - May Dawn's orb orange-raw shining over Palisades bare crowded branches bush up from marshes-- New Jersey with my father riding automobile highway to Newark Airport--Empire State's spire, horned buildingtops, Manhattan rising as in W. C. Williams' eyes between wire trestles-- trucks sixwheeled steady rolling overpass beside New York--I am here tiny under sun rising in vast white sky, staring thru skeleton new buildings, with pen in hand awake ... December , I walked outside &amp the bomb'd dropped lots of plutonium all over the Lower East Side There weren't any buildings left just iron skeletons groceries burned, potholes open to stinking sewer waters There were people starving and crawling across the desert the Martian UFOs with blue Light destroyer rays passed over and dried up all the waters Charred Amazon palmtrees for hundreds of miles on both sides of the river Sphincter I hope my good old asshole holds out years it's been mostly OK Tho in Bolivia a fissure operation survived the altiplano hospital-- a little blood, no polyps, occasionally a small hemorrhoid active, eager, receptive to phallus coke bottle, candle, carrot banana &amp fingers - Now AIDS makes it shy, but still eager to serve - out with the dumps, in with the condom'd orgasmic friend - still rubbery muscular, unashamed wide open for joy But another  years who knows, old folks got troubles everywhere - necks, prostates, stomachs, joints-- Hope the old hole stays young till death, relax - March , , : PM I met Einstein in a dream Springtime on Princeton lawn grass I kneeled down &amp kissed his young thumb like a ruddy pope his face fresh broad cheeked rosy I invented a universe separate, something like a Virgin - Yes, the creature gives birth to itself, I quoted from Mescaline We sat down open air universal summer to eat lunch, professors' wives at the Tennis Court Club, our meeting eternal, as expected, my gesture to kiss his fist unexpectedly saintly considering the Atom Bomb I didn't mention. - New York, December , And the Communists have nothing to offer but fat cheeks and eyeglasses and lying policemen and the Capitalists proffer Napalm and money in green suitcases to the Naked, and the Communists create heavy industry but the heart is also heavy and the beautiful engineers are all dead, the secret technicians conspire for their own glamour in the Future, in the Future, but now drink vodka and lament the Security Forces, and the Capitalists drink gin and whiskey on airplanes but let Indian brown millions starve and when Communist and Capitalist assholes tangle the Just man is arrested or robbed or has his head cut off, but not like Kabir, and the cigarette cough of the Just man above the clouds in the bright sunshine is a salute to the health of the blue sky. For I was arrested thrice in Prague, once for singing drunk on Narodni street, once knocked down on the midnight pavement by a mustached agent who screamed out BOUZERANT, once for losing my notebooks of unusual sex politics dream opinions, and I was sent from Havana by planes by detectives in green uniform, and I was sent from Prague by plane by detectives in Czechoslovakian business suits, Cardplayers out of Cezanne, the two strange dolls that entered Joseph K's room at morn also entered mine and ate at my table, and examined my scribbles, and followed me night and morn from the houses of the lovers to the cafes of Centrum - And I am the King of May, which is the power of sexual youth, and I am the King of May, which is long hair of Adam and Beard of my own body and I am the King of May, which is Kraj Majales in the Czechoslovakian tongue, and I am the King of May, which is old Human poesy, and , people chose my name, and I am the King of May, and in a few minutes I will land at London Airport, and I am the King of May, naturally, for I am of Slavic parentage and a Buddhist Jew who whorships the Sacred Heart of Christ the blue body of Krishna the straight back of Ram the beads of Chango the Nigerian singing Shiva Shiva in a manner which I have invented, and the King of May is a middleeuropean honor, mine in the XX century despite space ships and the Time Machine, because I have heard the voice of Blake in a vision and repeat that voice. And I am the King of May that sleeps with teenagers laughing. And I am the King of May, that I may be expelled from my Kingdom with Honor, as of old, To show the difference between Caesar's Kingdom and the Kingdom of the May of Man - and I am the King of May because I touched my finger to my forehead saluting a luminous heavy girl trembling hands who said one moment Mr. Ginsberg before a fat young Plainclothesman stepped between our bodies - I was going to England - and I am the King of May, in a giant jetplane touching Albion's airfield trembling in fear as the plane roars to a landing on the gray concrete, shakes &amp expels air, and rolls slowly to a stop under the clouds with part of blue heaven still visible. And tho' I am the King of May, the Marxists have beat me upon the street, kept me up all night in Police Station, followed me thru Springtime Prague, detained me in secret and deported me from our kingdom by airplane. This I have written this poem on a jet seat in mid Heaven. May , It had to be flashin' like the daily double It had to be playin' on TV It had to be loud mouthed on the comedy hour It had to be announced over loud speakers The CIA and Mafia are in cahoots It had to be said in old ladies' language It had to be said in American headlines Kennedy stretched and smiled and got double crossed by lowlife goons and agents Rich bankers with criminal connections Dope pushers in CIA working with dope pushers from Cuba working with a big time syndicate from Tampa, Florida And it had to be said with a big mouth It had to be moaned over factory foghorns It had to be chattered on car radio news broadcasts It had to be screamed in the kitchen It had to be yelled in the basement where uncles were fighting It had to be howled on the streets by newsboys to bus conductors It had to be foghorned into New York harbor It had to echo onto hard hats It had to turn up the volume in university ballrooms It had to be written in library books, footnoted It had to be in the headlines of the Times and the mind It had to be barked on TV It had to be heard in alleys through ballroom doors It had to be played on wire services It had to be bells ringing Comedians stopped dead in the middle of a joke in Las Vegas It had to be FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover and Frank Costello syndicate mouthpiece meeting in Central Park, New York weekends, reported Time magazine It had to be the Mafia and the CIA together starting war on Cuba, Bay of Pigs and poison assassination headlines It had to be dope cops in the Mafia Who sold all their heroin in America It had to be the FBI and organized crime working together in cahoots against the commies It had to be ringing on multinational cash registers World-wide laundry for organized criminal money It had to be the CIA and the Mafia and the FBI together They were bigger than Nixon And they were bigger that war It had to be a large room full of murder It had to be a mounted ass- a solid mass of rage A red hot pen A scream in the back of the throat It had to be a kid that can breathe It had to be in Rockefellers' mouth It had to be central intelligence, the family, allofthis, the agency Mafia It had to be organized crime One big set of gangs working together in cahoots Hitmen Murderers everywhere The secret The drunk The brutal The dirty rich On top of a slag heap of prisons Industrial cancer Plutonium smog Garbage cities Grandmas' bed soft from fathers' resentment It had to be the rulers They wanted law and order And they got rich on wanting protection for the status quo They wanted junkies They wanted Attica They wanted Kent State They wanted war in Indochina It had to be the CIA and the Mafia and the FBI Multinational capitalists Strong armed squads Private detective agencies for the rich And their armies and navies and their air force bombing planes It had to be capitalism The vortex of this rage This competition Man to man The horses head in a capitalists' bed The Cuban turf It rumbles in hitmen And gang wars across oceans Bombing Cambodia settled the score when Soviet pilots manned Egyptian fighter planes Chiles' red democracy Bumped off with White House pots and pans A warning to Mediterranean governments The secret police have been embraced for decades The NKPD and CIA keep each other's secrets The OGBU and DIA never hit their own The KGB and the FBI are one mind Brute force and full of money Brute force, world-wide, and full of money Brute force, world-wide, and full of money Brute force, world-wide, and full of money Brute force, world-wide, and full of money It had to be rich and it had to be powerful They had to murder in Indonesia They had to murder in Indochina They had to murder in Czechoslovakia They had to murder in Chile They had to murder in Russia And they had to murder in America New York, May , ,  A.M. Christ was your lord and captain all your life, He fails the world but you he did not fail, He led you through all forms of grief and strife Intact, a man full-armed, he let prevail Nor outward malice nor the worse-fanged snake That coils in one's own brain against your calm, That great rich jewel well guarded for his sake With coronal age and death like quieting balm. I Father having followed other guides And oftener to my hurt no leader at all, Through years nailed up like dripping panther hides For trophies on a savage temple wall Hardly anticipate that reverend stage Of life, the snow-wreathed honor of extreme age. Peace is the heir of dead desire, Whether abundance killed the cormorant In a happy hour, or sleep or death Drowned him deep in dreamy waters, Peace is the ashes of that fire, The heir of that king, the inn of that journey. This last and best and goal: we dead Hold it so tight you are envious of us And fear under sunk lids contempt. Death-day greetings are the sweetest. Let trumpets roar when a man dies And rockets fly up, he has found his fortune. Yet hungering long and pitiably That way, you shall not reach a finger To pluck it unripe and before dark Creep to cover: life broke ten whipstocks Over my back, broke faith, stole hope, Before I denounced the covenant of courage. The storm-dances of gulls, the barking game of seals, Over and under the ocean ... Divinely superfluous beauty Rules the games, presides over destinies, makes trees grow And hills tower, waves fall. The incredible beauty of joy Stars with fire the joining of lips, O let our loves too Be joined, there is not a maiden Burns and thirsts for love More than my blood for you, by the shore of seals while the wings Weave like a web in the air Divinely superfluous beauty. Is it not by his high superfluousness we know Our God? For to equal a need Is natural, animal, mineral: but to fling Rainbows over the rain And beauty above the moon, and secret rainbows On the domes of deep sea-shells, And make the necessary embrace of breeding Beautiful also as fire, Not even the weeds to multiply without blossom Nor the birds without music: There is the great humaneness at the heart of things, The extravagant kindness, the fountain Humanity can understand, and would flow likewise If power and desire were perch-mates. Stone-cutters fighting time with marble, you foredefeated Challengers of oblivion Eat cynical earnings, knowing rock splits, records fall down, The square-limbed Roman letters Scale in the thaws, wear in the rain. The poet as well Builds his monument mockingly For man will be blotted out, the blithe earth die, the brave sun Die blind and blacken to the heart: Yet stones have stood for a thousand years, and pained thoughts found The honey of peace in old poems. I am heaping the bones of the old mother To build us a hold against the host of the air Granite the blood-heat of her youth Held molten in hot darkness against the heart Hardened to temper under the feet Of the ocean cavalry that are maned with snow And march from the remotest west. This is the primitive rock, here in the wet Quarry under the shadow of waves Whose hollows mouthed the dawn little house each stone Baptized from that abysmal font The sea and the secret earth gave bonds to affirm you. The bud stands for all things, even for those things that don't flower, for everything flowers, from within, of self-blessing though sometimes it is necessary to reteach a thing its loveliness, to put a hand on its brow of the flower and retell it in words and in touch it is lovely until it flowers again from within, of self-blessing as Saint Francis put his hand on the creased forehead of the sow, and told her in words and in touch blessings of earth on the sow, and the sow began remembering all down her thick length, from the earthen snout all the way through the fodder and slops to the spiritual curl of the tail, from the hard spininess spiked out from the spine down through the great broken heart to the blue milken dreaminess spurting and shuddering from the fourteen teats into the fourteen mouths sucking and blowing beneath them: the long, perfect loveliness of sow. He climbed to the top of one of those million white pines set out across the emptying pastures of the fifties - some program to enrich the rich and rebuke the forefathers who cleared it all at once with ox and axe - climbed to the top, probably to get out of the shadow not of those forefathers but of this father and saw for the first time down in its valley, Bruce Pond, giving off its little steam in the afternoon, pond where Clarence Akley came on Sunday mornings to cut down the cedars around the shore, I'd sometimes hear the slow spondees of his work, he's gone, where Milton Norway came up behind me while I was fishing and stood awhile before I knew he was there, he's the one who put the cedar shingles on the house, some have curled or split, a few have blown off, he's gone, where Gus Newland logged in the cold snap of ', the only man will- ing to go into those woods that never got warmer than ten below, he's gone, pond where two wards of the state wandered on Halloween, the Na- tional Guard searched for them in November, in vain, the next fall a hunter found their skeletons huddled together, in vain, they're gone, pond where an old fisherman in a rowboat sits, drowning hooked worms, when he goes he's replaced and is never gone, and when Fergus saw the pond for the first time in the clear evening, saw its oldness down there in its old place in the valley, he became heavier suddenly in his bones the way fledglings do just before they fly, and the soft pine cracked . . . I would not have heard his cry if my electric saw had been working, its carbide teeth speeding through the bland spruce of our time, or burning black arcs into some scavenged hemlock plank, like dark circles under eyes when the brain thinks too close to the skin, but I was sawing by hand and I heard that cry as though he were attacked we ran out, when we bent over him he said, "Galway, In└s, I saw a pond!" His face went gray, his eyes fluttered close a frightening moment . . . Yes - a pond that lets off its mist on clear afternoons of August, in that valley to which many have come, for their reasons, from which many have gone, a few for their reasons, most not, where even now and old fisherman only the pinetops can see sits in the dry gray wood of his rowboat, waiting for pickerel. You scream, waking from a nightmare. When I sleepwalk into your room, and pick you up, and hold you up in the moonlight, you cling to me hard, as if clinging could save us. I think you think I will never die, I think I exude to you the permanence of smoke or stars, even as my broken arms heal themselves around you. I have heard you tell the sun, don't go down, I have stood by as you told the flower, don't grow old, don't die. Little Maud, I would blow the flame out of your silver cup, I would suck the rot from your fingernail, I would brush your sprouting hair of the dying light, I would scrape the rust off your ivory bones, I would help death escape through the little ribs of your body, I would alchemize the ashes of your cradle back into wood, I would let nothing of you go, ever, until washerwomen feel the clothes fall asleep in their hands, and hens scratch their spell across hatchet blades, and rats walk away from the cultures of the plague, and iron twists weapons toward the true north, and grease refuses to slide in the machinery of progress, and men feel as free on earth as fleas on the bodies of men, and lovers no longer whisper to the presence beside them in the dark, O corpse-to-be ... And yet perhaps this is the reason you cry, this the nightmare you wake screaming from: being forever in the pre-trembling of a house that falls. In a restaurant once, everyone quietly eating, you clambered up on my lap: to all the mouthfuls rising toward all the mouths, at the top of your voice you cried your one word, caca! caca! caca! and each spoonful stopped, a moment, in midair, in its withering steam. Yes, you cling because I, like you, only sooner than you, will go down the path of vanished alphabets, the roadlessness to the other side of the darkness, your arms like the shoes left behind, like the adjectives in the halting speech of old men, which once could call up the lost nouns. And you yourself, some impossible Tuesday in the year Two Thousand and Nine, will walk out among the black stones of the field, in the rain, and the stones saying over their one word, ci-g?t, ci-g?t, ci-g?t, and the raindrops hitting you on the fontanel over and over, and you standing there unable to let them in. If one day it happens you find yourself with someone you love in a caf└ at one end of the Pont Mirabeau, at the zinc bar where white wine stands in upward opening glasses, and if you commit then, as we did, the error of thinking, one day all this will only be memory, learn, as you stand at this end of the bridge which arcs, from love, you think, into enduring love, learn to reach deeper into the sorrows to come C to touch the almost imaginary bones under the face, to hear under the laughter the wind crying across the black stones. Kiss the mouth which tells you, here, here is the world. This mouth. This laughter. These temple bones. The still undanced cadence of vanishing. In the light the moon sends back, I can see in your eyes the hand that waved once in my father's eyes, a tiny kite wobbling far up in the twilight of his last look: and the angel of all mortal things lets go the string. Back you go, into your crib. The last blackbird lights up his gold wings: farewell. Your eyes close inside your head, in sleep. Already in your dreams the hours begin to sing. Little sleep's-head sprouting hair in the moonlight, when I come back we will go out together, we will walk out together among the ten thousand things, each scratched too late with such knowledge, the wages of dying is love. There is a fork in a branch of an ancient, enormous maple, one of a grove of such trees, where I climb sometimes and sit and look out over miles of valleys and low hills. Today on skis I took a friend to show her the trees. We set out down the road, turned in at the lane which a few weeks ago, when the trees were almost empty and the November snows had not yet come, lay thickly covered in bright red and yellow leaves, crossed the swamp, passed the cellar hole holding the remains of the s farmhouse that had slid down into it by stages in the thirties and forties, followed the overgrown logging road and came to the trees. I climbed up to the perch, and this time looked not into the distance but at the tree itself, its trunk contorted by the terrible struggle of that time when it had its hard time. After the trauma it grows less solid. It may be some such time now comes upon me. It would have to do with the unaccomplished, and with the attempted marriage of solitude and happiness. Then a rifle sounded, several times, quite loud, from across the valley, percussions of the custom of male mastery over the earth ！ the most graceful, most alert of the animals being chosen to die. I looked to see if my friend had heard, but she was stepping about on her skis, studying the trees, smiling to herself, her lips still filled, for all we had drained them, with hundreds and thousands of kisses. Just then she looked up ！ the way, from low to high, the god blesses ！ and the blue of her eyes shone out of the black and white of bark and snow, as lovers who are walking on a freezing day touch icy cheek to icy cheek, kiss, then shudder to discover the heat waiting inside their mouths. I love to go out in late September among the fat, overripe, icy black blackberries to eat blackberries for breakfast, the stalks are very prickly, a penalty they earn for knowing the black art of blackberry-making and as I stand among them lifting the stalks to my mouth, the ripest berries fall almost unbidden to my tongue, as words sometimes do, certain peculiar words like strengths or squinched, many-lettered, one-syllabled lumps which I squeeze, squinch open, and splurge well in the silent, startled, icy, black language of blackberry-eating in late September. We walk across the snow, The stars can be faint, The moon can be eating itself out, There can be meteors flaring to death on earth, The Northern Lights can be blooming and seething And tearing themselves apart all night, We walk arm in arm, and we are happy. You in whose ultimate madness we live, You flinging yourself out into the emptiness, You - like us - great an instant, O only universe we know, forgive us. The stars were wild that summer evening As on the low lake shore stood you and I And every time I caught your flashing eye Or heard your voice discourse on anything It seemed a star went burning down the sky. I looked into your heart that dying summer And found your silent woman's heart grown wild Whereupon you turned to me and smiled Saying you felt afraid but that you were Weary of being mute and undefiled I spoke to you that last winter morning Watching the wind smoke snow across the ice Told of how the beauty of your spirit, flesh, And smile had made day break at night and spring Burst beauty in the wasting winter's place. You did not answer when I spoke, but stood As if that wistful part of you, your sorrow, Were blown about in fitful winds below Your eyes replied your worn heart wished it could Again be white and silent as the snow. As this plane dragged its track of used ozone half the world long thrusts some four hundred of us toward places where actual known people live and may wait, we diminish down in our seats, disappeared into novels of lives clearer than ours, and yet we do not forget for a moment the life down there, the doorway each will soon enter: where I will meet her again and know her again, dark radiance with, and then mostly without, the stars. Very likely she has always understood what I have slowly learned, and which only now, after being away, almost as far away as one can get on this globe, almost as far as thoughts can carry - yet still in her presence, still surrounded not so much by reminders of her as by things she had already reminded me of, shadows of her cast forward and waiting  - can I try to express: that love is hard, that while many good things are easy, true love is not, because love is first of all a power, its own power, which continually must make its way forward, from night into day, from transcending union always forward into difficult day. And as the plane descends, it comes to me in the space where tears stream down across the stars, tears fallen on the actual earth where their shining is what we call spirit, that once the lover recognizes the other, knows for the first time what is most to be valued in another, from then on, love is very much like courage, perhaps it is courage, and even perhaps only courage. Squashed out of old selves, smearing the darkness of expectation across experience, all of us little thinkers it brings home having similar thoughts of landing to the imponderable world, the transoceanic airliner, resting its huge weight down, comes in almost lightly, to where with sudden, tiny, white puffs and long, black, rubberish smears all its tires know the home ground. In late winter I sometimes glimpse bits of steam coming up from some fault in the old snow and bend close and see it is lung-colored and put down my nose and know the chilly, enduring odor of bear. I take a wolf's rib and whittle it sharp at both ends and coil it up and freeze it in blubber and place it out on the fairway of the bears. And when it has vanished I move out on the bear tracks, roaming in circles until I come to the first, tentative, dark splash on the earth. And I set out running, following the splashes of blood wandering over the world. At the cut, gashed resting places I stop and rest, at the crawl-marks where he lay out on his belly to overpass some stretch of bauchy ice I lie out dragging myself forward with bear-knives in my fists. On the third day I begin to starve, at nightfall I bend down as I knew I would at a turd sopped in blood, and hesitate, and pick it up, and thrust it in my mouth, and gnash it down, and rise and go on running. On the seventh day, living by now on bear blood alone, I can see his upturned carcass far out ahead, a scraggled, steamy hulk, the heavy fur riffling in the wind. I come up to him and stare at the narrow-spaced, petty eyes, the dismayed face laid back on the shoulder, the nostrils flared, catching perhaps the first taint of me as he died. I hack a ravine in his thigh, and eat and drink, and tear him down his whole length and open him and climb in and close him up after me, against the wind, and sleep. And dream of lumbering flatfooted over the tundra, stabbed twice from within, splattering a trail behind me, splattering it out no matter which way I lurch, no matter which parabola of bear-transcendence, which dance of solitude I attempt, which gravity-clutched leap, which trudge, which groan. Until one day I totter and fall -- fall on this stomach that has tried so hard to keep up, to digest the blood as it leaked in, to break up and digest the bone itself: and now the breeze blows over me, blows off the hideous belches of ill-digested bear blood and rotted stomach and the ordinary, wretched odor of bear, blows across my sore, lolled tongue a song or screech, until I think I must rise up and dance. And I lie still. I awaken I think. Marshlights reappear, geese come trailing again up the flyway. In her ravine under old snow the dam-bear lies, licking lumps of smeared fur and drizzly eyes into shapes with her tongue. And one hairy-soled trudge stuck out before me, the next groaned out, the next, the next, the rest of my days I spend wandering: wondering what, anyway, was that sticky infusion, that rank flavor of blood, that poetry, by which I lived? from Body Rags, Galway Kinnell (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, ). Let America be America again. Let it be the dream it used to be. Let it be the pioneer on the plain Seeking a home where he himself is free. (America never was America to me.) Let America be the dream the dreamers dreamed-- Let it be that great strong land of love Where never kings connive nor tyrants scheme That any man be crushed by one above. (It never was America to me.) O, let my land be a land where Liberty Is crowned with no false patriotic wreath, But opportunity is real, and life is free, Equality is in the air we breathe. (There's never been equality for me, Nor freedom in this "homeland of the free.") Say, who are you that mumbles in the dark? And who are you that draws your veil across the stars? I am the poor white, fooled and pushed apart, I am the Negro bearing slavery's scars. I am the red man driven from the land, I am the immigrant clutching the hope I seek-- And finding only the same old stupid plan Of dog eat dog, of mighty crush the weak. I am the young man, full of strength and hope, Tangled in that ancient endless chain Of profit, power, gain, of grab the land! Of grab the gold! Of grab the ways of satisfying need! Of work the men! Of take the pay! Of owning everything for one's own greed! I am the farmer, bondsman to the soil. I am the worker sold to the machine. I am the Negro, servant to you all. I am the people, humble, hungry, mean-- Hungry yet today despite the dream. Beaten yet today--O, Pioneers! I am the man who never got ahead, The poorest worker bartered through the years. Yet I'm the one who dreamt our basic dream In the Old World while still a serf of kings, Who dreamt a dream so strong, so brave, so true, That even yet its mighty daring sings In every brick and stone, in every furrow turned That's made America the land it has become. O, I'm the man who sailed those early seas In search of what I meant to be my home-- For I'm the one who left dark Ireland's shore, And Poland's plain, and England's grassy lea, And torn from Black Africa's strand I came To build a "homeland of the free." The free? Who said the free?  Not me? Surely not me?  The millions on relief today? The millions shot down when we strike? The millions who have nothing for our pay? For all the dreams we've dreamed And all the songs we've sung And all the hopes we've held And all the flags we've hung, The millions who have nothing for our pay-- Except the dream that's almost dead today. O, let America be America again-- The land that never has been yet-- And yet must be--the land where every man is free. The land that's mine--the poor man's, Indian's, Negro's, ME-- Who made America, Whose sweat and blood, whose faith and pain, Whose hand at the foundry, whose plow in the rain, Must bring back our mighty dream again. Sure, call me any ugly name you choose-- The steel of freedom does not stain. From those who live like leeches on the people's lives, We must take back our land again, America! O, yes, I say it plain, America never was America to me, And yet I swear this oath-- America will be! Out of the rack and ruin of our gangster death, The rape and rot of graft, and stealth, and lies, We, the people, must redeem The land, the mines, the plants, the rivers. The mountains and the endless plain-- All, all the stretch of these great green states-- And make America again! I, too, sing America. I am the darker brother. They send me to eat in the kitchen When company comes, But I laugh, And eat well, And grow strong. Tomorrow, I'll be at the table When company comes. Nobody'll dare Say to me, "Eat in the kitchen," Then. Besides, They'll see how beautiful I am And be ashamed-- I, too, am America. I went down to the river, I set down on the bank. I tried to think but couldn't, So I jumped in and sank. I came up once and hollered! I came up twice and cried! If that water hadn't a-been so cold I might've sunk and died. But it was      Cold in that water!      It was cold! I took the elevator Sixteen floors above the ground. I thought about my baby And thought I would jump down. I stood there and I hollered! I stood there and I cried! If it hadn't a-been so high I might've jumped and died. But it was      High up there!      It was high! So since I'm still here livin', I guess I will live on. I could've died for love-- But for livin' I was born Though you may hear me holler, And you may see me cry-- I'll be dogged, sweet baby, If you gonna see me die. Life is fine!      Fine as wine!      Life is fine! Well, son, I'll tell you: Life for me ain't been no crystal stair. It's had tacks in it, And splinters, And boards torn up, And places with no carpet on the floor！ Bare. But all the time I'se been a-climbin' on, And reachin' landin's, And turnin' corners, And sometimes goin' in the dark Where there ain't been no light. So, boy, don't you turn back. Don't you set down on the steps. 'Cause you finds it's kinder hard. Don't you fall now！ For I'se still goin', honey, I'se still climbin', And life for me ain't been no crystal stair. What happens to a dream deferred? Does it dry up Like a raisin in the sun? Or fester like a sore-- And then run? Does it stink like rotten meat? Or crust and sugar over-- like a syrupy sweet? Maybe it just sags like a heavy load. Or does it explode? I would liken you To a night without stars Were it not for your eyes. I would liken you To a sleep without dreams Were it not for your songs. I been scared and battered. My hopes the wind done scattered. Snow has friz me, Sun has baked me, Looks like between 'em they done Tried to make me Stop laughin', stop lovin', stop livin'-- But I don't care! I'm still here! Children, I come back today To tell you a story of the long dark way That I had to climb, that I had to know In order that the race might live and grow. Look at my face -- dark as the night -- Yet shining like the sun with love's true light. I am the dark girl who crossed the red sea Carrying in my body the seed of the free. I am the woman who worked in the field Bringing the cotton and the corn to yield. I am the one who labored as a slave, Beaten and mistreated for the work that I gave -- Children sold away from me, I'm husband sold, too. No safety , no love, no respect was I due. Three hundred years in the deepest South: But God put a song and a prayer in my mouth . God put a dream like steel in my soul. Now, through my children, I'm reaching the goal. Now, through my children, young and free, I realized the blessing deed to me. I couldn't read then. I couldn't write. I had nothing, back there in the night. Sometimes, the valley was filled with tears, But I kept trudging on through the lonely years. Sometimes, the road was hot with the sun, But I had to keep on till my work was done: I had to keep on! No stopping for me -- I was the seed of the coming Free. I nourished the dream that nothing could smother Deep in my breast -- the Negro mother. I had only hope then , but now through you, Dark ones of today, my dreams must come true: All you dark children in the world out there, Remember my sweat, my pain, my despair. Remember my years, heavy with sorrow -- And make of those years a torch for tomorrow. Make of my pass a road to the light Out of the darkness, the ignorance, the night. Lift high my banner out of the dust. Stand like free men supporting my trust. Believe in the right, let none push you back. Remember the whip and the slaver's track. Remember how the strong in struggle and strife Still bar you the way, and deny you life -- But march ever forward, breaking down bars. Look ever upward at the sun and the stars. Oh, my dark children, may my dreams and my prayers Impel you forever up the great stairs -- For I will be with you till no white brother Dares keep down the children of the Negro Mother. To fling my arms wide In some place of the sun, To whirl and to dance Till the white day is done. Then rest at cool evening Beneath a tall tree While night comes on gently, Dark like me- That is my dream! To fling my arms wide In the face of the sun, Dance! Whirl! Whirl! Till the quick day is done. Rest at pale evening... A tall, slim tree... Night coming tenderly Black like me. I've known rivers: I've known rivers ancient as the world and older than the flow of human blood in human veins. My soul has grown deep like the rivers. I bathed in the Euphrates when dawns were young. I built my hut near the Congo and it lulled me to sleep. I looked upon the Nile and raised the pyramids above it. I heard the singing of the Mississippi when Abe Lincoln went down to New Orleans, and I've seen its muddy bosom turn all golden in the sunset. I've known rivers: Ancient, dusky rivers. My soul has grown deep like the rivers. The instructor said, Go home and write a page tonight. And let that page come out of you-- Then, it will be true. I wonder if it's that simple? I am twenty-two, colored, born in Winston-Salem. I went to school there, then Durham, then here to this college on the hill above Harlem. I am the only colored student in my class. The steps from the hill lead down into Harlem, through a park, then I cross St. Nicholas, Eighth Avenue, Seventh, and I come to the Y, the Harlem Branch Y, where I take the elevator up to my room, sit down, and write this page: It's not easy to know what is true for you or me at twenty-two, my age. But I guess I'm what I feel and see and hear, Harlem, I hear you: hear you, hear me--we two--you, me, talk on this page. (I hear New York, too.) Me--who? Well, I like to eat, sleep, drink, and be in love. I like to work, read, learn, and understand life. I like a pipe for a Christmas present, or records--Bessie, bop, or Bach. I guess being colored doesn't make me not like the same things other folks like who are other races. So will my page be colored that I write? Being me, it will not be white. But it will be a part of you, instructor. You are white-- yet a part of me, as I am a part of you. That's American. Sometimes perhaps you don't want to be a part of me. Nor do I often want to be a part of you. But we are, that's true! As I learn from you, I guess you learn from me-- although you're older--and white-- and somewhat more free. This is my page for English B. That Justice is a blind goddess Is a thing to which we black are wise: Her bandage hides two festering sores That once perhaps were eyes. and  are . and  are . But what would happen If the last  was late? And how would it be If one  was me? Or if the first  was you Divided by ? Democracy will not come Today, this year Nor ever Through compromise and fear. I have as much right As the other fellow has To stand On my two feet And own the land. I tire so of hearing people say, Let things take their course. Tomorrow is another day. I do not need my freedom when I'm dead. I cannot live on tomorrow's bread. Freedom Is a strong seed Planted In a great need. I live here, too. I want freedom Just as you. Droning a drowsy syncopated tune, Rocking back and forth to a mellow croon, I heard a Negro play. Down on Lenox Avenue the other night By the pale dull pallor of an old gas light He did a lazy sway . . . He did a lazy sway . . . To the tune o' those Weary Blues. With his ebony hands on each ivory key He made that poor piano moan with melody. O Blues! Swaying to and fro on his rickety stool He played that sad raggy tune like a musical fool. Sweet Blues! Coming from a black man's soul. O Blues! In a deep song voice with a melancholy tone I heard that Negro sing, that old piano moan-- "Ain't got nobody in all this world, Ain't got nobody but ma self. I's gwine to quit ma frownin' And put ma troubles on the shelf." Thump, thump, thump, went his foot on the floor. He played a few chords then he sang some more-- "I got the Weary Blues And I can't be satisfied. Got the Weary Blues And can't be satisfied-- I ain't happy no mo' And I wish that I had died." And far into the night he crooned that tune. The stars went out and so did the moon. The singer stopped playing and went to bed While the Weary Blues echoed through his head. He slept like a rock or a man that's dead. When I get to be a composer I'm gonna write me some music about Daybreak in Alabama And I'm gonna put the purtiest songs in it Rising out of the ground like a swamp mist And falling out of heaven like soft dew. I'm gonna put some tall tall trees in it And the scent of pine needles And the smell of red clay after rain And long red necks And poppy colored faces And big brown arms And the field daisy eyes Of black and white black white black people And I'm gonna put white hands And black hands and brown and yellow hands And red clay earth hands in it Touching everybody with kind fingers And touching each other natural as dew In that dawn of music when I Get to be a composer And write about daybreak In Alabama. What the Heart of the Young Man Said to the Psalmist TELL me not in mournful numbers Life is but an empty dream!！ For the soul is dead that slumbers And things are not what they seem. Life is real! Life is earnest! And the grave is not its goal Dust thou art to dust returnest Was not spoken of the soul. Not enjoyment and not sorrow Is our destined end or way But to act that each to-morrow Find us farther than to-day. Art is long and Time is fleeting And our hearts though stout and brave Still like muffled drums are beating Funeral marches to the grave. In the world's broad field of battle In the bivouac of Life Be not like dumb driven cattle! Be a hero in the strife! Trust no Future howe'er pleasant! Let the dead Past bury its dead! Act ！act in the living Present! Heart within and God o'erhead! Lives of great men all remind us We can make our lives sublime And departing leave behind us Footprints on the sands of time Footprints that perhaps another Sailing o'er life's solemn main A forlorn and shipwrecked brother Seeing shall take heart again. Let us then be up and doing With a heart for any fate Still achieving still pursuing Learn to labor and to wait. WHEN the hours of Day are numbered And the voices of the Night Wake the better soul that slumbered To a holy calm delight Ere the evening lamps are lighted And like phantoms grim and tall Shadows from the fitful firelight Dance upon the parlor wall Then the forms of the departed Enter at the open door The beloved the true-hearted Come to visit me once more He the young and strong who cherished Noble longings for the strife By the roadside fell and perished Weary with the march of life! They the holy ones and weakly Who the cross of suffering bore Folded their pale hands so meekly Spake with us on earth no more! And with them the Being Beauteous Who unto my youth was given More than all things else to love me And is now a saint in heaven. With a slow and noiseless footstep Comes that messenger divine Takes the vacant chair beside me Lays her gentle hand in mine. And she sits and gazes at me With those deep and tender eyes Like the stars so still and saint-like Looking downward from the skies. Uttered not yet comprehended Is the spirit's voiceless prayer Soft rebukes in blessings ended Breathing from her lips of air. Oh though oft depressed and lonely All my fears are laid aside If I but remember only Such as these have lived and died! (Lied: Ins Stille Land) BY JOHANN GAUDENZ VON SALIS-SEEWIS INTO the Silent Land! Ah! who shall lead us thither? Clouds in the evening sky more darkly gather And shattered wrecks lie thicker on the strand. Who leads us with a gentle hand Thither oh thither Into the Silent Land? Into the Silent Land! To you ye boundless regions Of all perfection! Tender morning-visions Of beauteous souls! The Future's pledge and band! Who in Life's battle firm doth stand Shall bear Hope's tender blossoms Into the Silent Land! O Land! O Land! For all the broken-hearted The mildest herald by our fate allotted Beckons and with inverted torch doth stand To lead us with a gentle hand To the land of the great Departed Into the Silent Land! "SPEAK! speak! thou fearful guest! Who, with thy hollow breast Still in rude armor drest, Comest to daunt me! Wrapt not in Eastern balms, But with thy fleshless palms Stretched, as if asking alms, Why dost thou haunt me?" Then, from those cavernous eyes Pale flashes seemed to rise, As when the Northern skies Gleam in December And, like the water's flow Under December's snow, Came a dull voice of woe From the heart's chamber. "I was a Viking old! My deeds, though manifold, No Skald in song has told, No Saga taught thee! Take heed, that in thy verse Thou dost the tale rehearse, Else dread a dead man's curse For this I sought thee. "Far in the Northern Land, By the wild Baltic's strand, I, with my childish hand, Tamed the gerfalcon And, with my skates fast-bound, Skimmed the half-frozen Sound, That the poor whimpering hound Trembled to walk on. "Oft to his frozen lair Tracked I the grisly bear, While from my path the hare Fled like a shadow Oft through the forest dark Followed the were-wolf's bark, Until the soaring lark Sang from the meadow. "But when I older grew, Joining a corsair's crew, O'er the dark sea I flew With the marauders. Wild was the life we led Many the souls that sped, Many the hearts that bled, By our stern orders. "Many a wassail-bout Wore the long Winter out Often our midnight shout Set the cocks crowing, As we the Berserk's tale Measured in cups of ale, Draining the oaken pail, Filled to o'erflowing. "Once as I told in glee Tales of the stormy sea, Soft eyes did gaze on me, Burning yet tender And as the white stars shine On the dark Norway pine, On that dark heart of mine Fell their soft splendor. "I wooed the blue-eyed maid, Yielding, yet half afraid, And in the forest's shade Our vows were plighted. Under its loosened vest Fluttered her little breast, Like birds within their nest By the hawk frighted. "Bright in her father's hall Shields gleamed upon the wall, Loud sang the minstrels all, Chanting his glory When of old Hildebrand I asked his daughter's hand, Mute did the minstrels stand To hear my story. "While the brown ale he quaffed, Loud then the champion laughed, And as the wind-gusts waft The sea-foam brightly, So the loud laugh of scorn, Out of those lips unshorn, From the deep drinking-horn Blew the foam lightly. "She was a Prince's child, I but a Viking wild, And though she blushed and smiled, I was discarded! Should not the dove so white Follow the sea-mew's flight, Why did they leave that night Her nest unguarded? "Scarce had I put to sea, Bearing the maid with me, Fairest of all was she Among the Norsemen! When on the white sea-strand, Waving his arm┬d hand, Saw we old Hildebrand, With twenty horsemen. "Then launched they to the blast, Bent like a reed each mast, Yet we were gaining fast, When the wind failed us And with a sudden flaw Came round the gusty Skaw, So that our foe we saw Laugh as he hailed us. "And as to catch the gale Round veered the flapping sail, 'Death!' was the helmsman's hail, 'Death without quarter!' Mid-ships with iron keel Struck we her ribs of steel Down her black hulk did reel Through the black water! "As with his wings aslant, Sails the fierce cormorant, Seeking some rocky haunt, With his prey laden, So toward the open main, Beating to sea again, Through the wild hurricane, Bore I the maiden. "Three weeks we westward bore, And when the storm was o'er, Cloud-like we saw the shore Stretching to leeward There for my lady's bower Built I the lofty tower, Which, to this very hour, Stands looking seaward. "There lived we many years Time dried the maiden's tears She had forgot her fears, She was a mother Death closed her mild blue eyes, Under that tower she lies Ne'er shall the sun arise On such another! "Still grew my bosom then, Still as a stagnant fen! Hateful to me were men, The sunlight hateful! In the vast forest here, Clad in my warlike gear, Fell I upon my spear, Oh, death was grateful! "Thus, seamed with many scars, Bursting these prison bars, Up to its native stars My soul ascended! There from the flowing bowl Deep drinks the warrior's soul, Skoal! to the Northland! skoal!" Thus the tale ended. UNDER a spreading chestnut tree The village smithy stands The smith, a mighty man is he, With large and sinewy hands And the muscles of his brawny arms Are strong as iron bands. His hair is crisp, and black, and long, His face is like the tan His brow is wet with honest sweat, He earns whate'er he can, And looks the whole world in the face, For he owes not any man. Week in, week out, from morn till night, You can hear his bellows blow You can hear him swing his heavy sledge With measured beat and slow, Like a sexton ringing the village bell, When the evening sun is low. And children coming home from school Look in at the open door They love to see the flaming forge, And hear the bellows roar, And watch the burning sparks that fly Like chaff from a threshing-floor. He goes on Sunday to the church, And sits among his boys He hears the parson pray and preach, He hears his daughter's voice, Singing in the village choir, And it makes his heart rejoice. It sounds to him like her mother's voice, Singing in Paradise! He needs must think of her once more, How in the grave she lies And with his hard, rough hand he wipes A tear out of his eyes. Toiling,！rejoicing,！sorrowing, Onward through life he goes Each morning sees some task begin, Each evening sees it close Something attempted, something done, Has earned a night's repose. Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend, For the lesson thou hast taught! Thus at the flaming forge of life Our fortunes must be wrought Thus on its sounding anvil shaped Each burning deed and thought! THE RISING moon has hid the stars Her level rays, like golden bars, Lie on the landscape green, With shadows brown between. And silver white the river gleams, As if Diana, in her dreams, Had dropt her silver bow Upon the meadows low. On such a tranquil night as this, She woke Endymion with a kiss, When, sleeping in the grove, He dreamed not of her love. Like Dian's kiss, unasked, unsought, Love gives itself, but is not bought Nor voice, nor sound betrays Its deep, impassioned gaze. It comes,！the beautiful, the free, The crown of all humanity,！ In silence and alone To seek the elected one. It lifts the boughs, whose shadows deep Are Life's oblivion, the soul's sleep, And kisses the closed eyes Of him who slumbering lies. O weary hearts! O slumbering eyes! O drooping souls, whose destinies Are fraught with fear and pain, Ye shall be loved again! No one is so accursed by fate, No one so utterly desolate, But some heart, though unknown, Responds unto his own. Responds,！as if with unseen wings, An angel touched its quivering strings And whispers, in its song, "Where hast thou stayed so long?" MAIDEN! with the meek brown eyes In whose orbs a shadow lies Like the dusk in evening skies! Thou whose locks outshine the sun Golden tresses wreathed in one As the braided streamlets run! Standing with reluctant feet Where the brook and river meet Womanhood and childhood fleet! Gazing with a timid glance On the brooklet's swift advance On the river's broad expanse! Deep and still that gliding stream Beautiful to thee must seem As the river of a dream. Then why pause with indecision When bright angels in thy vision Beckon thee to fields Elysian? Seest thou shadows sailing by As the dove with startled eye Sees the falcon's shadow fly? Hearest thou voices on the shore That our ears perceive no more Deafened by the cataract's roar? Oh thou child of many prayers! Life hath quicksands Life hath snares! Care and age come unawares! Like the swell of some sweet tune Morning rises into noon May glides onward into June. Childhood is the bough where slumbered Birds and blossoms many numbered！ Age that bough with snows encumbered. Gather then each flower that grows When the young heart overflows To embalm that tent of snows. Bear a lily in thy hand Gates of brass cannot withstand One touch of that magic wand. Bear through sorrow wrong and ruth In thy heart the dew of youth On thy lips the smile of truth. O that dew like balm shall steal Into wounds that cannot heal Even as sleep our eyes doth seal And that smile like sunshine dart Into many a sunless heart For a smile of God thou art. THE SHADES of night were falling fast As through an Alpine village passed A youth who bore 'mid snow and ice A banner with the strange device Excelsior! His brow was sad his eye beneath Flashed like a falchion from its sheath And like a silver clarion rung The accents of that unknown tongue Excelsior! In happy homes he saw the light Of household fires gleam warm and bright Above the spectral glaciers shone And from his lips escaped a groan Excelsior! Try not the Pass! the old man said Dark lowers the tempest overhead, The roaring torrent is deep and wide! And loud that clarion voice replied Excelsior! Oh, stay, the maiden said and rest Thy weary head upon this breast! A tear stood in his bright blue eye But still he answered with a sigh Excelsior! Beware the pine-tree's withered branch! Beware the awful avalanche! This was the peasant's last Good-night A voice replied far up the height Excelsior! At break of day as heavenward The pious monks of Saint Bernard Uttered the oft-repeated prayer A voice cried through the startled air Excelsior! A traveller by the faithful hound Half-buried in the snow was found Still grasping in his hand of ice That banner with the strange device Excelsior! There in the twilight cold and gray Lifeless but beautiful he lay And from the sky serene and far A voice fell like a falling star Excelsior! THIS is the Arsenal. From floor to ceiling Like a huge organ rise the burnished arms But from their silent pipes no anthem pealing Startles the villages with strange alarms. Ah! what a sound will rise how wild and dreary When the death-angel touches those swift keys! What loud lament and dismal Miserere Will mingle with their awful symphonies! I hear even now the infinite fierce chorus The cries of agony the endless groan Which through the ages that have gone before us In long reverberations reach our own. On helm and harness rings the Saxon hammer Through Cimbric forest roars the Norseman's song And loud amid the universal clamor O'er distant deserts sounds the Tartar gong. I hear the Florentine who from his palace Wheels out his battle-bell with dreadful din And Aztec priests upon their teocallis Beat the wild war-drums made of serpent's skin The tumult of each sacked and burning village The shouts that every prayer for mercy drowns The soldiers' revels in the midst of pillage The wail of famine in beleaguered towns The bursting shell the gateway wrenched asunder The rattling musketry the clashing blade And ever and anon in tones of thunder The diapason of the cannonade. Is it O man with such discordant noises With such accursed instruments as these Thou drownest Nature's sweet and kindly voices And jarrest the celestial harmonies? Were half the power that fills the world with terror Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts Given to redeem the human mind from error There were no need of arsenals or forts: The warrior's name would be a name abhorr┬d! And every nation that should lift again Its hand against a brother on its forehead Would wear forevermore the curse of Cain! Down the dark future through long generations The echoing sounds grow fainter and then cease And like a bell with solemn sweet vibrations I hear once more the voice of Christ say Peace! Peace! and no longer from its brazen portals The blast of War's great organ shakes the skies! But beautiful as songs of the immortals The holy melodies of love arise. IN the valley of the Pegnitz, where across broad meadowlands Rise the blue Franconian mountains, Nuremberg, the ancient, stands. Quaint old town of toil and traffic, quaint old town of art and song, Memories haunt thy pointed gables, like the rooks that round them throng: Memories of the Middle Ages, when the emperors, rough and bold, Had their dwelling in thy castle, time-defying, centuries old And thy brave and thrifty burghers boasted, in their uncouth rhyme, That their great imperial city stretched its hand through every clime. In the court-yard of the castle, bound with many an iron band, Stands the mighty linden planted by Queen Cunigunde's hand On the square the oriel window, where in old heroic days Sat the poet Melchior singing Kaiser Maximilian's praise. Everywhere I see around me rise the wondrous world of Art: Fountains wrought with richest sculpture standing in the common mart And above cathedral doorways saints and bishops carved in stone, By a former age commissioned as apostles to our own. In the church of sainted Sebald sleeps enshrined his holy dust, And in bronze the Twelve Apostles guard from age to age their trust In the church of sainted Lawrence stands a pix of sculpture rare, Like the foamy sheaf of fountains, rising through the painted air. Here, when Art was still religion, with a simple, reverent heart, Lived and labored Albrecht D┨rer, the Evangelist of Art Hence in silence and in sorrow, toiling still with busy hand, Like an emigrant he wandered, seeking for the Better Land. Emigravit is the inscription on the tombstone where he lies Dead he is not, but departed,！for the artist never dies. Fairer seems the ancient city, and the sunshine seems more fair, That he once has trod its pavement, that he once has breathed its air! Through these streets so broad and stately, these obscure and dismal lanes, Walked of yore the Mastersingers, chanting rude poetic strains. From remote and sunless suburbs came they to the friendly guild, Building nests in Fame's great temple, as in spouts the swallows build. As the weaver plied the shuttle, wove he too the mystic rhyme, And the smith his iron measures hammered to the anvil's chime Thanking God, whose boundless wisdom makes the flowers of poesy bloom In the forge's dust and cinders, in the tissues of the loom. Here Hans Sachs, the cobbler-poet, laureate of the gentle craft, Wisest of the Twelve Wise Masters, in huge folios sang and laughed. But his house is now an ale-house, with a nicely sanded floor, And a garland in the window, and his face above the door Painted by some humble artist, as in Adam Puschman's song, As the old man gray and dove-like, with his great beard white and long. And at night the swart mechanic comes to drown his cark and care, Quaffing ale from pewter tankards, in the master's antique chair. Vanished is the ancient splendor, and before my dreamy eye Wave these mingled shapes and figures, like a faded tapestry. Not thy Councils, not thy Kaisers, win for thee the world's regard But thy painter, Albrecht D┨rer, and Hans Sachs, thy cobbler bard. Thus, O Nuremberg, a wanderer from a region far away, As he paced thy streets and court-yards, sang in thought his careless lay: Gathering from the pavement's crevice, as a floweret of the soil, The nobility of labor,！the long pedigree of toil. THE DAY is done and the darkness Falls from the wings of Night As a feather is wafted downward From an eagle in his flight. I see the lights of the village Gleam through the rain and the mist And a feeling of sadness comes o'er me That my soul cannot resist: A feeling of sadness and longing That is not akin to pain And resembles sorrow only As the mist resembles the rain. Come read to me some poem Some simple and heartfelt lay That shall soothe this restless feeling And banish the thoughts of day. Not from the grand old masters Not from the bards sublime Whose distant footsteps echo Through the corridors of Time. For like strains of martial music Their mighty thoughts suggest Life's endless toil and endeavor And to-night I long for rest. Read from some humbler poet Whose songs gushed from his heart As showers from the clouds of summer Or tears from the eyelids start Who through long days of labor And nights devoid of ease Still heard in his soul the music Of wonderful melodies. Such songs have power to quiet The restless pulse of care And come like the benediction That follows after prayer. Then read from the treasured volume The poem of thy choice And lend to the rhyme of the poet The beauty of thy voice. And the night shall be filled with music And the cares that infest the day Shall fold their tents like the Arabs And as silently steal away. WHEN descends on the Atlantic The gigantic Storm-wind of the equinox Landward in his wrath he scourges The toiling surges Laden with seaweed from the rocks: From Bermuda's reefs from edges Of sunken ledges In some far-off bright Azore From Bahama and the dashing Silver-flashing Surges of San Salvador From the tumbling surf that buries The Orkneyan skerries Answering the hoarse Hebrides And from wrecks of ships and drifting Spars uplifting On the desolate rainy seas！ Ever drifting drifting drifting On the shifting Currents of the restless main Till in sheltered coves and reaches Of sandy beaches All have found repose again. So when storms of wild emotion Strike the ocean Of the poet's soul erelong From each cave and rocky fastness In its vastness Floats some fragment of a song: From the far-off isles enchanted Heaven has planted With the golden fruit of Truth From the flashing surf whose vision Gleams Elysian In the tropic clime of Youth From the strong Will and the Endeavor That forever Wrestle with the tides of Fate From the wreck of Hopes far-scattered Tempest-shattered Floating waste and desolate！ Ever drifting drifting drifting On the shifting Currents of the restless heart Till at length in books recorded They like hoarded Household words no more depart. THERE is no flock however watched and tended But one dead lamb is there! There is no fireside howsoe'er defended But has one vacant chair! The air is full of farewells to the dying And mournings for the dead The heart of Rachel for her children crying Will not be comforted! Let us be patient! These severe afflictions Not from the ground arise But oftentimes celestial benedictions Assume this dark disguise. We see but dimly through the mists and vapors Amid these earthly damps What seem to us but sad funereal tapers May be heaven's distant lamps. There is no Death! What seems so is transition This life of mortal breath Is but a suburb of the life elysian Whose portal we call Death. She is not dead ！the child of our affection ！ But gone unto that school Where she no longer needs our poor protection And Christ himself doth rule. In that great cloister's stillness and seclusion By guardian angels led Safe from temptation safe from sin's pollution She lives whom we call dead Day after day we think what she is doing In those bright realms of air Year after year her tender steps pursuing Behold her grown more fair. Thus do we walk with her and keep unbroken The bond which nature gives Thinking that our remembrance though unspoken May reach her where she lives. Not as a child shall we again behold her For when with raptures wild In our embraces we again enfold her She will not be a child But a fair maiden in her Father's mansion Clothed with celestial grace And beautiful with all the soul's expansion Shall we behold her face. And though at times impetuous with emotion And anguish long suppressed The swelling heart heaves moaning like the ocean That cannot be at rest ！ We will be patient and assuage the feeling We may not wholly stay By silence sanctifying not concealing The grief that must have way. A MIST was driving down the British Channel, The day was just begun, And through the window-panes, on floor and panel, Streamed the red autumn sun. It glanced on flowing flag and rippling pennon, And the white sails of ships And, from the frowning rampart, the black cannon Hailed it with feverish lips. Sandwich and Romney, Hastings, Hithe, and Dover, Were all alert that day, To see the French war-steamers speeding over, When the fog cleared away. Sullen and silent, and like couchant lions, Their cannon, through the night, Holding their breath, had watched, in grim defiance, The sea-coast opposite. And now they roared at drum-beat from their stations, On every citadel Each answering each, with morning salutations, That all was well. And down the coast, all taking up the burden, Replied the distant forts, As if to summon from his sleep the Warden And Lord of the Cinque Ports. Him shall no sunshine from the fields of azure, No drum-beat from the wall, No morning gun from the black fort's embrasure, Awaken with its call! No more, surveying with an eye impartial The long line of the coast, Shall the gaunt figure of the old Field Marshal Be seen upon his post! For in the night, unseen, a single warrior, In sombre harness mailed, Dreaded of man, and surnamed the Destroyer, The rampart wall had scaled. He passed into the chamber of the sleeper, The dark and silent room, And as he entered, darker grew, and deeper, The silence and the gloom. He did not pause to parley or dissemble, But smote the Warden hoar Ah! what a blow! that made all England tremble And groan from shore to shore. Meanwhile, without, the surly cannon waited, The sun rose bright o'erhead Nothing in Nature's aspect intimated That a great man was dead. OFTEN I think of the beautiful town That is seated by the sea Often in thought go up and down The pleasant streets of that dear old town, And my youth comes back to me. And a verse of a Lapland song Is haunting my memory still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I can see the shadowy lines of its trees, And catch, in sudden gleams, The sheen of the far-surrounding seas, And islands that were the Hesperides Of all my boyish dreams. And the burden of that old song, It murmurs and whispers still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I remember the black wharves and the slips, And the sea-tides tossing free And Spanish sailors with bearded lips, And the beauty and mystery of the ships, And the magic of the sea. And the voice of that wayward song Is singing and saying still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I remember the bulwarks by the shore, And the fort upon the hill The sunrise gun, with its hollow roar, The drum-beat repeated o'er and o'er, And the bugle wild and shrill. And the music of that old song Throbs in my memory still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I remember the sea-fight far away, How it thundered o'er the tide! And the dead captains, as they lay In their graves, o'erlooking the tranquil bay, Where they in battle died. And the sound of that mournful song Goes through me with a thrill: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I can see the breezy dome of groves, The shadows of Deering's Woods And the friendships old and the early loves Come back with a Sabbath sound, as of doves In quiet neighborhoods. And the verse of that sweet old song, It flutters and murmurs still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." I remember the gleams and glooms that dart Across the school-boy's brain The song and the silence in the heart, That in part are prophecies, and in part Are longings wild and vain. And the voice of that fitful song Sings on, and is never still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." There are things of which I may not speak There are dreams that cannot die There are thoughts that make the strong heart weak, And bring a pallor into the cheek, And a mist before the eye. And the words of that fatal song Come over me like a chill: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." Strange to me now are the forms I meet When I visit the dear old town But the native air is pure and sweet, And the trees that o'ershadow each well-known street, As they balance up and down, Are singing the beautiful song, Are sighing and whispering still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." And Deering's Woods are fresh and fair, And with joy that is almost pain My heart goes back to wander there, And among the dreams of the days that were, I find my lost youth again. And the strange and beautiful song, The groves are repeating it still: "A boy's will is the wind's will, And the thoughts of youth are long, long thoughts." AT anchor in Hampton Roads we lay, On board of the Cumberland, sloop-of-war And at times from the fortress across the bay The alarum of drums swept past, Or a bugle blast From the camp on the shore. Then far away to the south uprose A little feather of snow-white smoke, And we knew that the iron ship of our foes Was steadily steering its course To try the force Of our ribs of oak. Down upon us heavily runs, Silent and sullen, the floating fort Then comes a puff of smoke from her guns, And leaps the terrible death, With fiery breath, From each open port. We are not idle, but send her straight Defiance back in a full broadside! As hail rebounds from a roof of slate, Rebounds our heavier hail From each iron scale Of the monster's hide. "Strike your flag!" the rebel cries, In his arrogant old plantation strain. "Never!" our gallant Morris replies "It is better to sink than to yield!" And the whole air pealed With the cheers of our men. Then, like a kraken huge and black, She crushed our ribs in her iron grasp! Down went the Cumberland all a wrack, With a sudden shudder of death, And the cannon's breath For her dying gasp. Next morn, as the sun rose over the bay, Still floated our flag at the mainmast head. Lord, how beautiful was Thy day! Every waft of the air Was a whisper of prayer, Or a dirge for the dead. Ho! brave hearts that went down in the seas! Ye are at peace in the troubled stream Ho! brave land! with hearts like these, Thy flag, that is rent in twain, Shall be one again, And without a seam! Here the jack-hammer jabs into the ocean My heart, you race and stagger and demand More blood-gangs for your nigger-brass percussions, Till I, the stunned machine of your devotion, Clanging upon this cymbal of a hand, Am rattled screw and footloose. All discussions End in the mud-flat detritus of death. My heart, beat faster, faster. In Black Mud Hungarian workmen give their blood For the martyrs Stephen who was stoned to death. Black Myd, a name to conjure with: O mud For watermelons gutted to the crust, Mud for the mole-tide harbor, mud for mouse, Mud for teh armored Diesel fishing tubs that thud A year and a day to wind and tide the dust Is on this skipping heart that shakes my house, House of our Savior who was hanged till death. My heart, beat faster, faster. In Black Mud Stephen the martyre was broken down to blood: Our ransom is the rubble of his death. Christ walks on the black water. In Black Mud Darts the kingfisher. On Corpus Christi, heart, Over the drum-beat of St. Stephen's choir I hear him, Stupor Mundi, and the mud Flies from his hunching wings and beak--my heart, he blue kingfisher dives on you in fire. Only teaching on Tuesdays, book-worming in pajamas fresh from the washer each morning, I hog a whole house on Boston's "hardly passionate Marlborough Street," where even the man scavenging filth in the back alley trash cans, has two children, a beach wagon, a helpmate, and is "a young Republican." I have a nine months' daughter, young enough to be my granddaughter. Like the sun she rises in her flame-flamingo infants' wear. These are the tranquilized Fifties, and I am forty.  Ought I to regret my seedtime? I was a fire-breathing Catholic C.O., and made my manic statement, telling off the state and president, and then sat waiting sentence in the bull pen beside a negro boy with curlicues of marijuana in his hair. Given a year, I walked on the roof of the West Street Jail, a short enclosure like my school soccer court, and saw the Hudson River once a day through sooty clothesline entanglements and bleaching khaki tenements. Strolling, I yammered metaphysics with Abramowitz, a jaundice-yellow ("it's really tan") and fly-weight pacifist, so vegetarian, he wore rope shoes and preferred fallen fruit. He tried to convert Bioff and Brown, the Hollywood pimps, to his diet. Hairy, muscular, suburban, wearing chocolate double-breasted suits, they blew their tops and beat him black and blue. I was so out of things, I'd never heard of the Jehovah's Witnesses. "Are you a C.O.?" I asked a fellow jailbird. "No," he answered, "I'm a J.W." He taught me the "hospital tuck," and pointed out the T-shirted back of Murder Incorporated's Czar Lepke, there piling towels on a rack, or dawdling off to his little segregated cell full of things forbidden to the common man: a portable radio, a dresser, two toy American flags tied together with a ribbon of Easter palm. Flabby, bald, lobotomized, he drifted in a sheepish calm, where no agonizing reappraisal jarred his concentration on the electric chair hanging like an oasis in his air of lost connections. . . . Tamed by Miltown, we lie on Mother's bed the rising sun in war paint dyes us red in broad daylight her gilded bed-posts shine, abandoned, almost Dionysian. At last the trees are green on Marlborough Street, blossoms on our magnolia ignite the morning with their murderous five days' white. All night I've held your hand, as if you had a fourth time faced the kingdom of the mad-- its hackneyed speech, its homicidal eye-- and dragged me home alive. . . .Oh my Petite, clearest of all God's creatures, still all air and nerve: you were in our twenties, and I, once hand on glass and heart in mouth, outdrank the Rahvs in the heat of Greenwich Village, fainting at your feet-- too boiled and shy and poker-faced to make a pass, while the shrill verve of your invective scorched the traditional South. Now twelve years later, you turn your back. Sleepless, you hold your pillow to your hollows like a child your old-fashioned tirade-- loving, rapid, merciless-- breaks like the Atlantic Ocean on my head. It is the future generation that presses into being by means of these exuberant feelings and supersensible soap bubbles of ours. Schopenhauer The hot night makes us keep our bedroom windows open. Our magnolia blossoms. Life begins to happen. My hopped up husband drops his home disputes, and hits the streets to cruise for prostitutes, free-lancing out along the razor's edge. This screwball might kill his wife, then take the pledge. Oh the monotonous meanness of his lust... It's the injustice...he is so unjust- Whiskey-blind, swaggering home at five. My only thought is how to keep alive. What makes him trick? Each night now I tie ten dollars and his car key to my thigh... Gored by the climacteric of his want, he stalls above me like an elephant. (for Elizabeth Bishop) Nautilus Island's hermit heiress still lives through winter in her Spartan cottage her sheep still graze above the sea. Her son's a bishop. Her farmer is first selectman in our village she's in her dotage. Thirsting for the hierarchic privacy of Queen Victoria's century she buys up all the eyesores facing her shore and lets them fall. The season's ill-- we've lost our summer millionaire who seemed to leap from an L. L. Bean catalogue. His nine-knot yawl was auctioned off to lobstermen. A red fox stain covers Blue Hill. And bow our fairy decorator brightens his shop for fall his fishnet's filled with orange cork orange his cobbler's bench and awl there is no money in his work he'd rather marry. One dark night my Tutor Ford climbed the hill's skull I watched for love-cars. Lights turned down they lay together hull to hull where the graveyard shelves on the town.... My mind's not right. A car radio bleats "Love, O careless Love...." I hear my ill-spirit sob in each blood cell, as if my hand were at its throat.... I myself am hell nobody's here-- only skunks, that search in the moonlight for a bite to eat. They march on their soles up Main Street: white stripes, moonstruck eyes' red fire under the chalk-dry and spar spire of the Trinitarian Church. I stand on top of our back steps and breathe the rich air-- a mother skunk with her column of kittens swills the garbage pail. She jabs her wedge-head in a cup of sour cream, drops her ostrich tail, and will not scare. My whole eye was sunset red, the old cut cornea throbbed, I saw things darkly, as through an unwashed goldfish globe. I lay all day on my bed. I chain-smoked through the night, learning to flinch at the flash of the matchlight. Outside, the summer rain, a simmer of rot and renewal, fell in pinpricks. Even new life is fuel. My eyes throb. Nothing can dislodge the house with my first tooth noosed in a knot to the doorknob. Nothing can dislodge the triangular blotch of rot on the red roof, a cedar hedge, or the shade of a hedge. No ease from the eye of the sharp-shinned hawk in the birdbook there, with reddish-brown buffalo hair on its shanks, one asectic talon clasping the abstract imperial sky. It says: an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. No ease for the boy at the keyhole, his telescope, when the women's white bodies flashed in the bathroom. Young, my eyes began to fail. Nothing! No oil for the eye, nothing to pour on those waters or flames. I am tired. Everyone's tired of my turmoil. History has to live with what was here, clutching and close to fumbling all we had-- it is so dull and gruesome how we die, unlike writing, life never finishes. Abel was finished death is not remote, a flash-in-the-pan electrifies the skeptic, his cows crowding like skulls against high-voltage wire, his baby crying all night like a new machine. As in our Bibles, white-faced, predatory, the beautiful, mist-drunken hunter's moon ascends-- a child could give it a face: two holes, two holes, my eyes, my mouth, between them a skull's no-nose-- O there's a terrifying innocence in my face drenched with the silver salvage of the mornfrost. What was is...since The boys in my old gang are senior partners. They start up bald like baby birds to embrace retirement. At the altar of surrender I met you in the hour of credulity. How your misfortune came our clearly to us at twenty. At the gingerbread casino how innocent the nights we made it. on our Vesuvio martinis with no vermouth but vodka to sweeten the dry gin- the lash across my face that night we adored... soon every night and all when your sweet amorous repetition changed. Those blessed structures plot and rhyme- why are they no help to me now i want to make something imagined not recalled? I hear the noise of my own voice: The painter's vision is not a lens it trembles to caress the light. But sometimes everything i write With the threadbare art of my eye seems a snapshot lurid rapid garish grouped heightened from life yet paralyzed by fact. All's misalliance. Yet why not say what happened? Pray for the grace of accuracy Vermeer gave to the sun's illumination stealing like the tide across a map to his girl solid with yearning. We are poor passing facts. warned by that to give each figure in the photograph his living name. Temptations still nest in it like basilisks. Hang it up till the rings fall. Naturally it is night. Under the overturned lute with its One string I am going my way Which has a strange sound. This way the dust that way the dust. I listen to both sides But I keep right on. I remember the leaves sitting in judgment And then winter. I remember the rain with its bundles of roads. The rain taking all its roads. Nowhere. Young as I am old as I am I forget tomorrow the blind man. I forget the life among the buried windows. The eyes in the curtains. The wall Growing through the immortelles. I forget silence The owner of the smile. This must be what I wanted to be doing Walking at night between the two deserts Singing. For Galway Kinnell The rust a little pile of western color lies At the end of its travels Our instrument no longer. Those who believe In death have their worship cut out for them. As for myself we Continue An old Scar of light our trumpet Pilgrims with thorns To the eye of the cold Under flags made by the blind In one fist Their letter that vanishes If the hand opens: Charity come home Begin. Every year without knowing it I have passed the day When the last fires will wave to me And the silence will set out Tireless traveler Like the beam of a lightless star Then I will no longer Find myself in life as in a strange garment Surprised at the earth And the love of one woman And then shamelessness of men As today writing after three days of rain Hearing the wren sing and the falling cease And bowing not knowing to what In each world they may put us Farther apart Do not die As this world is made I might Live forever Look soul soul barefoot presence through whom blood falls as though a water clock and tears rise before they wake I will take you at last to where the wind stops by the river we know by that same water and the nights are not separate remember This is a place where a door might be here where I am standing In the light outside all the walls there would be a shadow here all day long and a door into it where now there is me and somebody would come and knock on this air long after I have gone and there in front of me a life would open There were years when I knew the flower in the red stone walls now in the courtyard where I have returned with you we drink the wine of visitors the temperature of the cellars dusk is welling out of the dried blood of the masonry no hour remains on the sundial by now the owls of the tower corners are waking on their keepers' fists but it is still day out in the air and three falcons appear there over the courtyard no feathers on heads or breasts and they fly down to us to our wrists and between them then hover and perch just above us keeping us in sight waiting they are waiting for us this time they will come with us when we leave the island tonight for the rest of our lives Would you believe me if I told you the name of the farmers at the end of the lake where it grew shallow over the mossy rocks and if you came in the morning the grass was blue the fur of the rocks was wet the small frogs jumped and the lake was silent behind you except for echoes you tied your boat carefully to a tree before setting out across the cool pasture watching for the bull all the way to the barn or if you came in the afternoon the pasture glared and hummed the dark leaves smelled from beside the water and the barn was drunk by the time you got to it to climb on the beams to dive into the distant hay will you believe the names of the farmers' children As the shadow closed  on the face once my father's Three times learning forward  far off she called Good night in a whisper  from before I was born later through the burial  a wren went on singing then it was that I left  for the coast to live a single long mountain  close to the shore from it the sun rose  and everyone there asked me who I was  I asked them who they were at that time I found the cave  under the mountain drawings still on the walls  carved fragments in the dirt all my days I spent there  groping in the floor but some who came from nearby  were wrecking the place for a game garbage through holes overhead  broken cars dead animals in the evenings they rolled huge rocks  down to smash the roof nothing that I could do  kept them from it for long the old story  the old story and in the morning the cave  full of new daylight If half of me is skewered by grey crested birds in the middle of the vines of my promise and the very fact that I'm a poet suffers my eyes to be filled with vermilion tears how much greater danger from occasion and pain is my vitality yielding like a tree on fire!-- for every day is another view of the tentative past grown secure in its foundry of shimmering that's not even historicalit's just me. And the other half of me where I master the root of my every idiosyncrasy and fit my ribs like a glove is that me who accepts betrayal in the abstract as if it were insight? and draws its knuckles across the much-lined eyes in the most knowing manner of our time? The wind that smiles through the wires isn't vague enough for an assertion of a personal nature it's not for me I'm not dead. Nothing remains let alone to be said  except that when I fall backwards I am trying something new and shall succeed as in the past. I know so much about things I accept so much it's like vomiting. And I am nourished by the shabbiness of my knowing so much about others and what they do and accepting so much that I hate as if I didn't know what it is to me. And what it is to them I know and hate. It's not so much abstractions are available: the lofty period of the mind ending a sentence while the pain endures: departures absences. And you are still on the dock the smoke hasn't cleared in The Narrows At noon I sit in Jim's Place waiting for George Who is mopping the stage up While two girls cry in the last row. I think they got laid last night. But who didn't? it was a spring night. Probably George did too. And now the ship has gone beyond come sheets windows streets telephones and noises: to where I cannot go not even a long distance swimmer like myself. I'm not going to cry all the time nor shall I laugh all the time I don't prefer one strain to another I'd have the immediacy of a bad movie not just a sleeper but also the big over-produced first-run kind. I want to be at least as alive as the vulgar. And if some aficionado of my mess says That's not like Frank! all to the god! I don't wear brown and grey suits all the time do I? No I wear workshirts to the opera often. I want my feet to be bare I want my face to be shaven and my heart-- you can't plan on the heart but the better part of it my poetry is open. He waits and it is not without a great deal of trouble that he tickles a nightingale with his guitar. He would like to cry Andiamo! but alas! no one has arrived yet although the dew is perfect for adieux. How bitterly he beats his hairy chest! because he is a man sitting out an indignity. The mean moon is like a nasty little lemon above the ubiquitous snivelling fir trees and if there's a swan within a radius of twelve square miles let's throttle it. We too are worried. He is a man like us erect in the cold dark night. Silence handles his guitar as clumsily as a wet pair of dungarees. The grass if full of snakespit. He alone is hot admist the stars. If no one is racing towards him down intriguingly hung stairways towards the firm lamp of his thighs we are indeed in trouble sprawling feet upwards to the sun our faces growing smaller in the colossal dark. The clouds ache bleakly and when they can manage it crush someone's head in without a sound of anger. This is a brutal mystery. We meet in the streets with our hands in our pockets and snarl guiltily at each other as if we had flayed a cloud or two in our salad days. Lots of things do blame us and in moments when I forget how cruel we really should be I often have to bite my tongue to keep from being guilty. Love set you going like a fat gold watch. The midwife slapped your footsoles, and your bald cry Took its place among the elements. Our voices echo, magnifying your arrival. New statue. In a drafty museum, your nakedness Shadows our safety. We stand round blankly as walls. I'm no more your mother Than the cloud that distills a mirror to reflect its own slow Effacement at the wind's hand. All night your moth-breath Flickers among the flat pink roses. I wake to listen: A far sea moves in my ear. One cry, and I stumble from bed, cow-heavy and floral In my Victorian nightgown. Your mouth opens clean as a cat's. The window square Whitens and swallows its dull stars. And now you try Your handful of notes The clear vowels rise like balloons. () How the elements solidify! --- The moonlight, that chalk cliff In whose rift we lie Back to back. I here an owl cry From its cold indigo. Intolerable vowels enter my heart. The child in the white crib revolves and sighs, Opens its mouth now, demanding. His little face is carved in pained, red wood. Then there are the stars - ineradicable, hard. One touch : it burns and sickens. I cannot see your eyes. Where apple bloom ices the night I walk in a ring, A groove of old faults, deep and bitter. Love cannot come here. A black gap discloses itself. On the opposite lip A small white soul is waving, a small white maggot. My limbs, also, have left me. Who has dismembered us? The dark is melting. We touch like cripples. The wet dawn inks are doing their blue dissolve. On their blotter of fog the trees Seem a botanical drawing-- Memories growning, ring on ring, A series of weddings. Knowing neither abortions nor bitchery, Truer than women, They seed so effortlessly! Tasting the winds, that are footless, Waisting-deep in history-- Full of wings, otherworldliness. In this, they are Ledas. O mother of leaves and sweetness Who are these peitas? The shadows of ringdoves chanting, but easing nothing. note: Ledas: Leda, the maiden who was raped by Zeus in the guise of a swan. You do not do, you do not do Any more, black shoe In which I have lived like a foot For thirty years, poor and white, Barely daring to breathe or Achoo. Daddy, I have had to kill you. You died before I had time--- Marble-heavy, a bag full of God, Ghastly statue with one gray toe Big as a Frisco seal And a head in the freakish Atlantic Where it pours bean green over blue In the waters off the beautiful Nauset. I used to pray to recover you. Ach, du. In the German tongue, in the Polish town Scraped flat by the roller Of wars, wars, wars. But the name of the town is common. My Polack friend Says there are a dozen or two. So I never could tell where you Put your foot, your root, I never could talk to you. The tongue stuck in my jaw. It stuck in a barb wire snare. Ich, ich, ich, ich, I could hardly speak. I thought every German was you. And the language obscene An engine, an engine, Chuffing me off like a Jew. A Jew to Dachau, Auschwitz, Belsen. I began to talk like a Jew. I think I may well be a Jew. The snows of the Tyrol, the clear beer of Vienna Are not very pure or true. With my gypsy ancestress and my weird luck And my Taroc pack and my Taroc pack I may be a bit of a Jew. I have always been sacred of you, With your Luftwaffe, your gobbledygoo. And your neat mustache And your Aryan eye, bright blue. Panzer-man, panzer-man, O You---- Not God but a swastika So black no sky could squeak through. Every woman adores a Fascist, The boot in the face, the brute Brute heart of a brute like you. You stand at the blackboard, daddy, In the picture I have of you, A cleft in your chin instead of your foot But no less a devil for that, no not Any less the black man who Bit my pretty red heart in two. I was ten when they buried you. At twenty I tried to die And get back, back, back to you. I thought even the bones would do. But they pulled me out of the sack, And they stuck me together with glue. And then I knew what to do. I made a model of you, A man in black with a Meinkampf look And a love of the rack and the screw. And I said I do, I do. So daddy, I'm finally through. The black telephone's off at the root, The voices just can't worm through. If I've killed one man, I've killed two--- The vampire who said he was you And drank my blood for a year, Seven years, if you want to know. Daddy, you can lie back now. There's a stake in your fat black heart And the villagers never liked you. They are dancing and stamping on you. They always knew it was you. Daddy, daddy, you bastard, I'm through. () I have done it again. One year in every ten I manage it_____ A sort of walking miracle, my skin Bright as a Nazi lampshade, My right foot A paperweight, My face featureless, fine Jew linen. Peel off the napkin O my enemy. Do I terrify?------- The nose, the eye pits, the full set of teeth? The sour breath Will vanish in a day. Soon, soon the flesh The grave cave ate will be At home on me And I a smiling woman. I am only thirty. And like the cat I have nine times to die. This is Number Three. What a trash To annihilate each decade. What a million filaments. The Peanut-crunching crowd Shoves in to see Them unwrap me hand in foot ------ The big strip tease. Gentleman , ladies These are my hands My knees. I may be skin and bone, Nevertheless, I am the same, identical woman. The first time it happened I was ten. It was an accident. The second time I meant To last it out and not come back at all. I rocked shut As a seashell. They had to call and call And pick the worms off me like sticky pearls. Dying Is an art, like everything else. I do it exceptionally well. I do it so it feels like hell. I do it so it feels real. I guess you could say I've a call. It's easy enough to do it in a cell. It's easy enough to do it and stay put. It's the theatrical Comeback in broad day To the same place, the same face, the same brute Amused shout: 'A miracle!' That knocks me out. There is a charge For the eyeing my scars, there is a charge For the hearing of my heart--- It really goes. And there is a charge, a very large charge For a word or a touch Or a bit of blood Or a piece of my hair on my clothes. So, so, Herr Doktor. So, Herr Enemy. I am your opus, I am your valuable, The pure gold baby That melts to a shriek. I turn and burn. Do not think I underestimate your great concern. Ash, ash--- You poke and stir. Flesh, bone, there is nothing there---- A cake of soap, A wedding ring, A gold filling. Herr God, Herr Lucifer Beware Beware. Out of the ash I rise with my red hair And I eat men like air. () I ordered this, clean wood box Square as a chair and almost too heavy to lift. I would say it was the coffin of a midget Or a square baby Were there not such a din in it. The box is locked, it is dangerous. I have to live with it overnight And I can't keep away from it. There are no windows, so I can't see what is in there. There is only a little grid, no exit. I put my eye to the grid. It is dark, dark, With the swarmy feeling of African hands Minute and shrunk for export, Black on black, angrily clambering. How can I let them out? It is the noise that appalls me most of all, The unintelligible syllables. It is like a Roman mob, Small, taken one by one, but my god, together! I lay my ear to furious Latin. I am not a Caesar. I have simply ordered a box of maniacs. They can be sent back. They can die, I need feed them nothing, I am the owner. I wonder how hungry they are. I wonder if they would forget me If I just undid the locks and stood back and turned into a tree. There is the laburnum, its blond colonnades, And the petticoats of the cherry. They might ignore me immediately In my moon suit and funeral veil. I am no source of honey So why should they turn on me? Tomorrow I will be sweet God, I will set them free. The box is only temporary. () This is the sea, then, this great abeyance. How the sun's poultice draws on my inflammation. Electrifyingly-colored sherbets, scooped from the freeze By pale girls, travel the air in scorched hands. Why is it so quiet, what are they hiding? I have two legs, and I move smilingly.. A sandy damper kills the vibrations It stretches for miles, the shrunk voices Waving and crutchless, half their old size. The lines of the eye, scalded by these bald surfaces, Boomerang like anchored elastics, hurting the owner. Is it any wonder he puts on dark glasses? Is it any wonder he affects a black cassock? Here he comes now, among the mackerel gatherers Who wall up their backs against him. They are handling the black and green lozenges like the parts of a body. The sea, that crystallized these, Creeps away, many-snaked, with a long hiss of distress. () This black boot has no mercy for anybody. Why should it, it is the hearse of a dad foot, The high, dead, toeless foot of this priest Who plumbs the well of his book, The bent print bulging before him like scenery. Obscene bikinis hid in the dunes, Breasts and hips a confectioner's sugar Of little crystals, titillating the light, While a green pool opens its eye, Sick with what it has swallowed---- Limbs, images, shrieks.  Behind the concrete bunkers Two lovers unstick themselves. O white sea-crockery, What cupped sighs, what salt in the throat.... And the onlooker, trembling, Drawn like a long material Through a still virulence, And a weed, hairy as privates. () On the balconies of the hotel, things are glittering. Things, things---- Tubular steel wheelchairs, aluminum crutches. Such salt-sweetness.  Why should I walk Beyond the breakwater, spotty with barnacles? I am not a nurse, white and attendant, I am not a smile. These children are after something, with hooks and cries, And my heart too small to bandage their terrible faults. This is the side of a man:  his red ribs, The nerves bursting like trees, and this is the surgeon: One mirrory eye---- A facet of knowledge. On a striped mattress in one room An old man is vanishing. There is no help in his weeping wife. Where are the eye-stones, yellow and vvaluable, And the tongue, sapphire of ash. () A wedding-cake face in a paper frill. How superior he is now. It is like possessing a saint. The nurses in their wing-caps are no longer so beautiful They are browning, like touched gardenias. The bed is rolled from the wall. This is what it is to be complete.  It is horrible. Is he wearing pajamas or an evening suit Under the glued sheet from which his powdery beak Rises so whitely unbuffeted? They propped his jaw with a book until it stiffened And folded his hands, that were shaking:  goodbye, goodbye. Now the washed sheets fly in the sun, The pillow cases are sweetening. It is a blessing, it is a blessing: The long coffin of soap-colored oak, The curious bearers and the raw date Engraving itself in silver with marvelous calm. () The gray sky lowers, the hills like a green sea Run fold upon fold far off, concealing their hollows, The hollows in which rock the thoughts of the wife---- Blunt, practical boats Full of dresses and hats and china and married daughters. In the parlor of the stone house One curtain is flickering from the open window, Flickering and pouring, a pitiful candle. This is the tongue of the dead man:  remember, remember. How far he is now, his actions Around him like livingroom furniture, like a dcor. As the pallors gather---- The pallors of hands and neighborly faces, The elate pallors of flying iris. They are flying off into nothing:  remember us. The empty benches of memory look over stones, Marble facades with blue veins, and jelly-glassfuls of daffodils. It is so beautiful up here:  it is a stopping place. () The natural fatness of these lime leaves!---- Pollarded green balls, the trees march to church. The voice of the priest, in thin air, Meets the corpse at the gate, Addressing it, while the hills roll the notes of the dead bell A glittler of wheat and crude earth. What is the name of that color?---- Old blood of caked walls the sun heals, Old blood of limb stumps, burnt hearts. The widow with her black pocketbook and three daughters, Necessary among the flowers, Enfolds her lace like fine linen, Not to be spread again. While a sky, wormy with put-by smiles, Passes cloud after cloud. And the bride flowers expend a fershness, And the soul is a bride In a still place, and the groom is red and forgetful, he is featureless. () Behind the glass of this car The world purrs, shut-off and gentle. And I am dark-suited and stil, a member of the party, Gliding up in low gear behind the cart. And the priest is a vessel, A tarred fabric,sorry and dull, Following the coffin on its flowery cart like a beautiful woman, A crest of breasts, eyelids and lips Storming the hilltop. Then, from the barred yard, the children Smell the melt of shoe-blacking, Their faces turning, wordless and slow, Their eyes opening On a wonderful thing---- Six round black hats in the grass and a lozenge of wood, And a naked mouth, red and awkward. For a minute the sky pours into the hole like plasma. There is no hope, it is given up. If the moon smiled, she would resemble you. You leave the same impression Of something beautiful, but annihilating. Both of you are great light borrowers. Her O-mouth grieves at the world yours is unaffected, And your first gift is making stone out of everything. I wake to a mausoleum you are here, Ticking your fingers on the marble table, looking for cigarettes, Spiteful as a woman, but not so nervous, And dying to say something unanswerable. The moon, too, abases her subjects But in the daytime she is ridiculous. Your dissatisfactions, on the other hand, Arrive through the mailslot with loving regularity, White and blank, expansive as carbon monoxide. No day is safe from news of you, Walking about in Africa maybe, but thinking of me. Axes After whose stroke the wood rings, And the echoes! Echoes traveling Off from the center like horses. The sap Wells like tears, like the Water striving To re-establish its mirror Over the rock That drops and turns, A white skull, Eaten by weedy greens. Years later I Encounter them on the road--- Words dry and riderless, The indefatigable hoof-taps. While From the bottom of the pool, fixed stars Govern a life. for Ruth Fainlight I know the bottom, she says. I know it with my great tap root It is what you fear. I do not fear it: I have been there. Is it the sea you hear in me, Its dissatisfactions? Or the voice of nothing, that was you madness? Love is a shadow. How you lie and cry after it. Listen: these are its hooves: it has gone off, like a horse. All night I shall gallup thus, impetuously, Till your head is a stone, your pillow a little turf, Echoing, echoing. Or shall I bring you the sound of poisons? This is rain now, the big hush. And this is the fruit of it: tin white, like arsenic. I have suffered the atrocity of sunsets. Scorched to the root My red filaments burn and stand,a hand of wires. Now I break up in pieces that fly about like clubs. A wind of such violence Will tolerate no bystanding: I must shriek. The moon, also, is merciless: she would drag me Cruelly, being barren. Her radiance scathes me. Or perhaps I have caught her. I let her go. I let her go Diminished and flat, as after radical surgery. How your bad dreams possess and endow me. I am inhabited by a cry. Nightly it flaps out Looking, with its hooks, for something to love. I am terrified by this dark thing That sleeps in me All day I feel its soft, feathery turnings, its malignity. Clouds pass and disperse. Are those the faces of love, those pale irretrievables? Is it for such I agitate my heart? I am incapable of more knowledge. What is this, this face So murderous in its strangle of branches? ---- Its snaky acids kiss. It petrifies the will. These are the isolate, slow faults That kill, that kill, that kill. Stasis in darkness. Then the substanceless blue Pour of tor and distances. God's lioness, How one we grow, Pivot of heels and knees! ---The furrow Splits and passes, sister to The brown arc Of the neck I cannot catch, Nigger-eye Berries cast dark Hooks --- Black sweet blood mouthfuls, Shadows. Something else Hauls me through air --- Thighs, hair Flakes from my heels. White Godiva, I unpeel --- Dead hands, dead stringencies. And now I Foam to wheat, a glitter of seas. The child's cry Melts in the wall. And I Am the arrow, The dew that flies, Suicidal, at one with the drive Into the red Eye, the cauldron of morning. Black lake, black boat, two black, cut-paper people. Where do the black trees go that drink here? Their shadows must cover Canada. A little light is filtering from the water flowers. Their leaves do not wish us to hurry: They are round and flat and full of dark advice. Cold worlds shake from the oar. The spirit of blackness is in us, it is in the fishes. A snag is lifting a valedictory, pale hand Stars open among the lilies. Are you not blinded by such expressionless sirens? This is the silence of astounded souls. Take this kiss upon the brow And in parting from you now Thus much let me avow --- You are not wrong who deem That my days have been a dream Yet if hope has flown away. In a night or in a day In a vision or in none Is it therefore the less gone? All that we see or seem Is but a dream within a dream. I stand amid the roar Of a surf-tormented shore And I hold within my hand Grains of the golden sand --- How few! Yet how they creep Throngh my fingers to the deep While I weep --- while I weep! O God! Can I not save One from the pitiless wave? Is all that we see or seem But a dream within a dream. Lo! 't is a gala night Within the lonesome latter years! An angel throng bewinged bedight In veils and drowned in tears Sit in a theatre to see A play of hopes and fears While the orchestra breathes fitfully The music of the spheres. Mimes in the form of God on high Mutter and mumble low And hither and thither fly - Mere puppets they who come and go At bidding of vast formless things That shift the scenery to and fro Flapping from out their Condor wings Invisible Woe! That motley drama! - oh be sure It shall not be forgot! With its Phantom chased for evermore By a crowd that seize it not Through a circle that ever returneth in To the self-same spot And much of Madness and more of Sin And Horror the soul of the plot. But see amid the mimic rout A crawling shape intrude! A blood-red thing that writhes from out The scenic solitude! It writhes! - it writhes! - with mortal pangs The mimes become its food And the seraphs sob at vermin fangs In human gore imbued. Out - out are the lights - out all! And over each quivering form The curtain a funeral pall Comes down with the rush of a storm And the angels all pallid and wan Uprising unveiling affirm That the play is the tragedy Man And its hero the Conqueror Worm. THOU wast that all to me love For which my soul did pine -- A green isle in the sea love A fountain and a shrine All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers And all the flowers were mine. Ah dream too bright to last! Ah starry Hope! that didst arise But to be overcast! A voice from out the Future cries On! on! -- but o'er the Past (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies Mute motionless aghast! For alas! alas! with me The light of Life is o'er! No more -- no more -- no more -- (Such language holds the solemn sea To the sands upon the shore) Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree Or the stricken eagle soar! And all my days are trances And all my nightly dreams Are where thy grey eye glances And where thy footstep gleams -- In what ethereal dances By what eternal streams. It was many and many a year ago In a kingdom by the sea That a maiden there lived whom you may know By the name of ANNABEL LEE And this maiden she lived with no other thought Than to love and be loved by me. I was a child and she was a child In this kingdom by the sea But we loved with a love that was more than love- I and my Annabel Lee With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven Coveted her and me. And this was the reason that long ago In this kingdom by the sea A wind blew out of a cloud chilling My beautiful Annabel Lee So that her highborn kinsman came And bore her away from me To shut her up in a sepulchre In this kingdom by the sea. The angels not half so happy in heaven Went envying her and me- Yes!- that was the reason (as all men know In this kingdom by the sea) That the wind came out of the cloud by night Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee. But our love it was stronger by far than the love Of those who were older than we- Of many far wiser than we- And neither the angels in heaven above Nor the demons down under the sea Can ever dissever my soul from the soul Of the beautiful Annabel Lee. For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams Of the beautiful Annabel Lee And the stars never rise but I feel the bright eyes Of the beautiful Annabel Lee And so all the night-tide I lie down by the side Of my darling- my darling- my life and my bride In the sepulchre there by the sea In her tomb by the sounding sea. ONCE upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,！ While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping, As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door. "'T is some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door Only this and nothing more." Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor. Eagerly I wished the morrow！vainly I had sought to borrow From my books surcease of sorrow！sorrow for the lost Lenore, For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore: Nameless here for evermore. And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain Thrilled me！filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating "'T is some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door, Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door: This it is and nothing more." Presently my soul grew stronger hesitating then no longer, "Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping, And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door, That I scarce was sure I heard you"！here I opened wide the door:！ Darkness there and nothing more. Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing, Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals ever dared to dream before But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token, And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore?" This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore:" Merely this and nothing more. Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning, Soon again I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before. "Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore: 'T is the wind and nothing more." Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter, In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore. Not the least obeisance made he not a minute stopped or stayed he But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door, Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door: Perched, and sat, and nothing more. Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,！ "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no craven, Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore: Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!" Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore." Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly, Though its answer little meaning！little relevancy bore For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door, Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door, With such name as "Nevermore." But the Raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour. Nothing further then he uttered, not a feather then he fluttered, Till I scarcely more than muttered,！"Other friends have flown before On the morrow he will leave me, as my Hopes have flown before." Then the bird said, "Nevermore." Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken, "Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store, Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore: Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore Of 'Never！nevermore.' But the Raven still beguiling all my fancy into smiling, Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore, What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore Meant in croaking "Nevermore." This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamplight gloated o'er, But whose velvet violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o'er She shall press, ah, nevermore! Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer Swung by seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor. "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee！by these angels he hath sent thee Respite！respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!" Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe, and forget this lost Lenore." Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore." "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil! prophet still, if bird or devil! Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore, Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted！ On this home by Horror haunted！tell me truly, I implore: Is there！is there balm in Gilead?！tell me！tell me, I implore!" Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore." "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil！prophet still, if bird or devil! By that Heaven that bends above us, by that God we both adore, Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn, It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore: Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore!" Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore." "Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked, upstarting: "Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore! Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken! Leave my loneliness unbroken! quit the bust above my door! Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!" Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore." And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming, And the lamp-light o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor: And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor Shall be lifted！nevermore! Helen thy beauty is to me Like those Nicean barks of yore That gently o'er a perfumed sea The weary wayworn wanderer bore To his own native shore. On desperate seas long wont to roam Thy hyacinth hair thy classic face Thy Naiad airs have brought me home To the glory that was Greece And the grandeur that was Rome. Lo! in yon brilliant window-niche How statue-like I see thee stand The agate lamp within thy hand! Ah Psyche from the regions which Are Holy Land! Science! true daughter of Old Time thou art! Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes. Why preyest thou thus upon the poet's heart Vulture whose wings are dull realities? How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing? Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car? And driven the Hamadryad from the wood To seek a shelter in some happier star? Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood The Elfin from the green grass and from me The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree? In Heaven a spirit doth dwell Whose heart-strings are a lute None sing so wildly well As the angel Israfel And the giddy stars (so legends tell) Ceasing their hymns attend the spell Of his voice all mute. Tottering above In her highest noon The enamored moon Blushes with love While to listen the red levin (With the rapid Pleiads even Which were seven ) Pauses in Heaven. And they say (the starry choir And the other listening things) That Israfeli's fire Is owing to that lyre By which he sits and sings- The trembling living wire Of those unusual strings. But the skies that angel trod Where deep thoughts are a duty- Where Love's a grown-up God- Where the Houri glances are Imbued with all the beauty Which we worship in a star. Therefore thou art not wrong Israfeli who despisest An unimpassioned song To thee the laurels belong Best bard because the wisest! Merrily live and long! The ecstasies above With thy burning measures suit- Thy grief thy joy thy hate thy love With the fervor of thy lute- Well may the stars be mute! Yes Heaven is thine but this Is a world of sweets and sours Our flowers are merely- flowers And the shadow of thy perfect bliss Is the sunshine of ours. If I could dwell Where Israfel Hath dwelt and he where I He might not sing so wildly well A mortal melody While a bolder note than this might swell From my lyre within the sky. Lo! Death has reared himself a throne In a strange city lying alone Far down within the dim West Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best Have gone to their eternal rest. There shrines and palaces and towers (Time-eaten towers that tremble not!) Resemble nothing that is ours. Around by lifting winds forgot Resignedly beneath the sky The melancholy waters lie. No rays from the holy heaven come down On the long night-time of that town But light from out the lurid sea Streams up the turrets silently- Gleams up the pinnacles far and free- Up domes- up spires- up kingly halls- Up fanes- up Babylon-like walls- Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers- Up many and many a marvellous shrine Whose wreathed friezes intertwine The viol the violet and the vine. Resignedly beneath the sky The melancholy waters lie. So blend the turrets and shadows there That all seem pendulous in air While from a proud tower in the town Death looks gigantically down. There open fanes and gaping graves Yawn level with the luminous waves But not the riches there that lie In each idol's diamond eye- Not the gaily-jewelled dead Tempt the waters from their bed For no ripples curl alas! Along that wilderness of glass- No swellings tell that winds may be Upon some far-off happier sea- No heavings hint that winds have been On seas less hideously serene. But lo a stir is in the air! The wave- there is a movement there! As if the towers had thrust aside In slightly sinking the dull tide- As if their tops had feebly given A void within the filmy Heaven. The waves have now a redder glow- The hours are breathing faint and low- And when amid no earthly moans Down down that town shall settle hence Hell rising from a thousand thrones Shall do it reverence. Although you sit in a room that is gray, Except for the silver Of the straw-paper, And pick At your pale white gown Or lift one of the green beads Of your necklace, To let it fall Or gaze at your green fan Printed with the red branches of a red willow Or, with one finger, Move the leaf in the bowl-- The leaf that has fallen from the branches of the forsythia Beside you... What is all this? I know how furiously your heart is beating. I Among twenty snowy mountains, The only moving thing Was the eye of the blackbird. II I was of three minds, Like a tree In which there are three blackbirds. III The blackbird whirled in the autumn winds. It was a small part of the pantomime. IV A man and a woman Are one. A man and a woman and a blackbird Are one. V I do not know which to prefer, The beauty of inflections Or the beauty of innuendoes, The blackbird whistling Or just after. VI Icicles filled the long window With barbaric glass. The shadow of the blackbird Crossed it, to and fro. The mood Traced in the shadow An indecipherable cause. VII O thin men of Haddam, Why do you imagine golden birds? Do you not see how the blackbird Walks around the feet Of the women about you? VIII I know noble accents And lucid, inescapable rhythms But I know, too, That the blackbird is involved In what I know. IX When the blackbird flew out of sight, It marked the edge Of one of many circles. X At the sight of blackbirds Flying in a green light, Even the bawds of euphony Would cry out sharply. XI He rode over Connecticut In a glass coach. Once, a fear pierced him, In that he mistook The shadow of his equipage For blackbirds. XII The river is moving. The blackbird must be flying. XIII It was evening all afternoon. It was snowing And it was going to snow. The blackbird sat In the cedar-limbs. I placed a jar in Tennessee, And round it was, upon a hill. It made the slovenly wilderness Surround that hill. The wilderness rose up to it, And sprawled around, no longer wild. The jar was round upon the ground And tall and of a port in air. It took dominion every where. The jar was gray and bare. It did not give of bird or bush, Like nothing else in Tennessee. One must have a mind of winter To regard the frost and the boughs Of the pine-trees crusted with snow And have been cold a long time To behold the junipers shagged with ice, The spruces rough in the distant glitter Of the January sun and not to think Of any misery in the sound of the wind, In the sound of a few leaves, Which is the sound of the land Full of the same wind That is blowing in the same bare place For the listener, who listens in the snow, And, nothing himself, beholds Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is. The poem of the mind in the act of finding What will suffice. It has not always had To find: the scene was set it repeated what Was in the script. Then the theatre was changed To something else. Its past was a souvenir. It has to be living, to learn the speech of the place. It has to face the men of the time and to meet The women of the time. It has to think about war And it has to find what will suffice. It has To construct a new stage. It has to be on that stage, And, like an insatiable actor, slowly and With meditation, speak words that in the ear, In the delicatest ear of the mind, repeat, Exactly, that which it wants to hear, at the sound Of which, an invisible audience listens, Not to the play, but to itself, expressed In an emotion as of two people, as of two Emotions becoming one. The actor is A metaphysician in the dark, twanging An instrument, twanging a wiry string that gives Sounds passing through sudden rightnesses, wholly Containing the mind, below which it cannot descend, Beyond which it has no will to rise. It must Be the finding of a satisfaction, and may Be of a man skating, a woman dancing, a woman Combing. The poem of the act of the mind. At the earliest ending of winter, In March, a scrawny cry from outside Seemed like a sound in his mind. He knew that he heard it, A bird's cry, at daylight or before, In the early March wind. The sun was rising at six, No longer a battered panache above snow... It would have been outside. It was not from the vast ventriloquism Of sleep's faded papier-mache... The sun was coming from the outside. That scrawny cry--It was A chorister whose c preceded the choir. It was part of the colossal sun, Surrounded by its choral rings, Still far away. It was like A new knowledge of reality. Twenty men crossing a bridge, Into a village, Are twenty men crossing twenty bridges, Into twenty villages, Or one man Crossing a single bridge into a village. This is old song That will not declare itself . . . Twenty men crossing a bridge, Into a village, Are Twenty men crossing a bridge Into a village. That will not declare itself Yet is certain as meaning . . . The boots of the men clump On the boards of the bridge. The first white wall of the village Rises through fruit-trees. Of what was it I was thinking? So the meaning escapes. The first white wall of the village . . . The fruit-trees . . . She sang beyond the genius of the sea. The water never formed to mind or voice, Like a body wholly body, fluttering Its empty sleeves and yet its mimic motion Made constant cry, caused constantly a cry, That was not ours although we understood, Inhuman, of the veritable ocean. The sea was not a mask.  No more was she. The song and water were not medleyed sound Even if what she sang was what she heard. Since what she sang was uttered word by word. It may be that in all her phrases stirred The grinding water and the gasping wind But it was she and not the sea we heard. For she was the maker of the song she sang. The ever-hooded, tragic-gestured sea Was merely a place by which she walked to sing. Whose spirit is this?  we said, because we knew It was the spirit that we sought and knew That we should ask this often as she sang. If it was only the dark voice of the sea That rose, or even colored by many waves If it was only the outer voice of sky And cloud, of the sunken coral water-walled, However clear, it would have been deep air, The heaving speech of air, a summer sound Repeated in a summer without end And sound alone.  But it was more than that, More even than her voice, and ours, among The meaningless plungings of water and the wind, Theatrical distances, bronze shadows heaped On high horizons, mountainous atmospheres Of sky and sea. It was her voice that made The sky acutest at its vanishing. She measured to the hour its solitude. She was the single artificer of the world In which she sang.  And when she sang, the sea, Whatever self it had, became the self That was her song, for she was the maker.  Then we, As we beheld her striding there alone, Knew that there never was a world for her Except the one she sang and, singing, made. Ramon Fernandez, tell me, if you know, Why, when the singing ended and we turned Toward the town, tell why the glassy lights, The lights in the fishing boats at anchor there, As night descended, tilting in the air, Mastered the night and portioned out the sea, Fixing emblazoned zones and fiery poles, Arranging, deepening, enchanting night. Oh!  Blessed rage for order, pale Ramon, The maker's rage to order words of the sea, Words of the fragrant portals, dimly-starred, And of ourselves and of our origins, In ghostlier demarcations, keener sounds. Poetry is the supreme fiction, madame. Take the moral law and make a nave of it And from the nave build haunted heaven.  Thus, The conscience is converted into palms, Like windy citherns hankering for hymns. We agree in principle.  That's clear.  But take The opposing law and make a peristyle, And from the peristyle project a masque Beyond the planets.  Thus, our bawdiness, Unpurged by epitaph, indulged at last, Is equally converted into palms, Squiggling like saxophones.  And palm for palm, Madame, we are where we began.  Allow, Therefore, that in the planetary scene Your disaffected flagellants, well-stuffed, Smacking their muzzy bellies in parade, Proud of such novelties of the sublime, Such tink and tank and tunk-a-tunk-tunk, May, merely may, madame, whip from themselves A jovial hullabaloo among the spheres. This will make widows wince.  But fictive things Wink as they will.  Wink most when widows wince. Call the roller of big cigars, The muscular one, and bid him whip In kitchen cups concupiscent curds. Let the wenches dawdle in such dress As they are used to wear, and let the boys Bring flowers in last month's newspapers. Let be be finale of seem. The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream. Take from the dresser of deal. Lacking the three glass knobs, that sheet On which she embroidered fantails once And spread it so as to cover her face. If her horny feet protrude, they come To show how cold she is, and dumb. Let the lamp affix its beam. The only emperor is the emperor of ice-cream. Chieftain Iffucan of Azcan in caftan Of tan with henna hackles, halt! Damned universal cock, as if the sun Was blackamoor to bear your blazing tail. Fat!  Fat!  Fat!  Fat!  I am the personal. Your world is you.  I am my world. You ten-foot poet among inchlings. Fat! Begone! An inchling bristles in these pines, Bristles, and points their Appalachian tangs, And fears not portly Azcan nor his hoos. At night, by the fire, The colors of the bushes And of the fallen leaves, Repeating themselves, Turned in the room, Like the leaves themselves Turning in the wind. Yes: but the color of the heavy hemlocks Came striding. And I remembered the cry of the peacocks. The colors of their tails Were like the leaves themselves Turning in the wind, In the twilight wind. They swept over the room, Just as they flew from the boughs of the hemlocks Down to the ground. I heard them cry -- the peacocks. Was it a cry against the twilight Or against the leaves themselves Turning in the wind, Turning as the flames Turned in the fire, Turning as the tails of the peacocks Turned in the loud fire, Loud as the hemlocks Full of the cry of the peacocks? Or was it a cry against the hemlocks? Out of the window, I saw how the planets gathered Like the leaves themselves Turning in the wind. I saw how the night came, Came striding like the color of the heavy hemlocks I felt afraid. And I remembered the cry of the peacocks. The houses are haunted By white night-gowns. None are green, Or purple with green rings, Or green with yellow rings, Or yellow with blue rings. None of them are strange, With socks of lace And beaded ceintures. People are not going To dream of baboons and periwinkles. Only, here and there, an old sailor, Drunk and asleep in his boots, Catches tigers In red weather. Complacencies of the peignoir, and late Coffee and oranges in a sunny chair, And the green freedom of a cockatoo Upon a rug mingle to dissipate The holy hush of ancient sacrifice. She dreams a little, and she feels the dark Encroachment of that old catastrophe, As a calm darkens among water-lights. The pungent oranges and bright, green wings Seem things in some procession of the dead, Winding across wide water, without sound. The day is like wide water, without sound, Stilled for the passion of her dreaming feet Over the seas, to silent Palestine, Dominion of the blood and sepulchre. Why should she give her bounty to the dead? What is divinity if it can come Only in silent shadows and in dreams? Shall she not find in the comforts of sun, In pungent fruit and bright, green wings, or else In any balm or beauty of the earth, Things to be cherished like the thought of heaven? Divinity must live within herself: Passions of rain, or moods in falling snow Grievings in loneliness, or unsubdued Elations when the forest blooms gusty Emotions on wet roads on autumn nights All pleasures and all pains, remembering The bough of summer and the winter branch. These are the measures destined for her soul. Jove in the clouds had his inhuman birth. No mother suckled him, no sweet land gave Large-mannered motions to his mythy mind He moved among us, as a muttering king, Magnificent, would move among his hinds, Until our blood, commingling, virginal, With heaven, brought such requital to desire The very hinds discerned it, in a star. Shall our blood fail? Or shall it come to be The blood of paradise? And shall the earth Seem all of paradise that we shall know? The sky will be much friendlier then than now, A part of labor and a part of pain, And next in glory to enduring love, Not this dividing and indifferent blue. She says, "I am content when wakened birds, Before they fly, test the reality Of misty fields, by their sweet questionings But when the birds are gone, and their warm fields Return no more, where, then, is paradise?" There is not any haunt of prophecy, Nor any old chimera of the grave, Neither the golden underground, nor isle Melodious, where spirits gat them home, Nor visionary south, nor cloudy palm Remote as heaven's hill, that has endured As April's green endures or will endure Like her rememberance of awakened birds, Or her desire for June and evening, tipped By the consummation of the swallow's wings. She says, "But in contentment I still feel The need of some imperishable bliss." Death is the mother of beauty hence from her, Alone, shall come fulfillment to our dreams And our desires. Although she strews the leaves Of sure obliteration on our paths, The path sick sorrow took, the many paths Where triumph rang its brassy phrase, or love Whispered a little out of tenderness, She makes the willow shiver in the sun For maidens who were wont to sit and gaze Upon the grass, relinquished to their feet. She causes boys to pile new plums and pears On disregarded plate. The maidens taste And stray impassioned in the littering leaves. Is there no change of death in paradise? Does ripe fruit never fall? Or do the boughs Hang always heavy in that perfect sky, Unchanging, yet so like our perishing earth, With rivers like our own that seek for seas They never find, the same receeding shores That never touch with inarticulate pang? Why set the pear upon those river-banks Or spice the shores with odors of the plum? Alas, that they should wear our colors there, The silken weavings of our afternoons, And pick the strings of our insipid lutes! Death is the mother of beauty, mystical, Within whose burning bosom we devise Our earthly mothers waiting, sleeplessly. Supple and turbulent, a ring of men Shall chant in orgy on a summer morn Their boisterous devotion to the sun, Not as a god, but as a god might be, Naked among them, like a savage source. Their chant shall be a chant of paradise, Out of their blood, returning to the sky And in their chant shall enter, voice by voice, The windy lake wherein their lord delights, The trees, like serafin, and echoing hills, That choir among themselves long afterward. They shall know well the heavenly fellowship Of men that perish and of summer morn. And whence they came and whither they shall go The dew upon their feet shall manifest. She hears, upon that water without sound, A voice that cries, "The tomb in Palestine Is not the porch of spirits lingering. It is the grave of Jesus, where he lay." We live in an old chaos of the sun, Or old dependency of day and night, Or island solitude, unsponsered, free, Of that wide water, inescapable. Deer walk upon our mountains, and the quail Whistle about us their spontaneous cries Sweet berries ripen in the wilderness And, in the isolation of the sky, At evening, casual flocks of pigeons make Abiguous undulations as they sink, Downward to darkness, on extended wings. I An old man sits In the shadow of a pine tree In China. He sees larkspur, Blue and white, At the edge of the shadow, Move in the wind. His beard moves in the wind. The pine tree moves in the wind. Thus water flows Over weeds. II The night is of the colour Of a woman's arm: Night, the female, Obscure, Fragrant and supple, Conceals herself. A pool shines, Like a bracelet Shaken in a dance. III I measure myself Against a tall tree. I find that I am much taller, For I reach right up to the sun, With my eye And I reach to the shore of the sea With my ear. Nevertheless, I dislike The way ants crawl In and out of my shadow. IV When my dream was near the moon, The white folds of its gown Filled with yellow light. The soles of its feet Grew red. Its hair filled With certain blue crystallizations From stars, Not far off. V Not all the knives of the lamp-posts, Nor the chisels of the long streets, Nor the mallets of the domes And high towers, Can carve What one star can carve, Shining through the grape-leaves. VI Rationalists, wearing square hats, Think, in square rooms, Looking at the floor, Looking at the ceiling. They confine themselves To right-angled triangles. If they tried rhomboids, Cones, waving lines, ellipses -- As, for example, the ellipse of the half-moon -- Rationalists would wear sombreros. Hi! The creator too is blind, Struggling toward his harmonious whole, Rejecting intermediate parts, Horrors and falsities and wrongs Incapable master of all force, Too vague idealist, overwhelmed By an afflatus that persists. For this, then, we endure brief lives, The evanescent symmetries From that meticulous potter's thumb. One's grand flights, one's Sunday baths, One's tootings at the weddings of the soul Occur as they occur. So bluish clouds Occurred above the empty house and the leaves Of the rhododendrons rattled their gold, As if someone lived there. Such floods of white Came bursting from the clouds. So the wind Threw its contorted strength around the sky. Could you have said the bluejay suddenly Would swoop to earth? It is a wheel, the rays Around the sun. The wheel survives the myths. The fire eye in the clouds survives the gods. To think of a dove with an eye of grenadine And pines that are cornets, so it occurs, And a little island full of geese and stars: It may be the ignorant man, alone, Has any chance to mate his life with life That is the sensual, pearly spuse, the life That is fluent in even the wintriest bronze. The house was quiet and the world was calm. The reader became the book and summer night Was like the conscious being of the book. The house was quiet and the world was calm. The words were spoken as if there was no book, Except that the reader leaned above the page, Wanted to lean, wanted much most to be The scholar to whom the book is true, to whom The summer night is like a perfection of thought. The house was quiet because it had to be. The quiet was part of the meaning, part of the mind: The access of perfection to the page. And the world was calm. The truth in a calm world, In which there is no other meaning, itself Is calm, itself is summer and night, itself Is the reader leaning late and reading there. Among the more irritating minor ideas Of Mr. Homburg during his visits home To Concord, at the edge of things, was this: To think away the grass, the trees, the clouds, Not to transform them into other things, Is only what the sun does every day, Until we say to ourselves that there may be A pensive nature, a mechanical And slightly detestable operandum, free From man's ghost, larger and yet a little like, Without his literature and without his gods . . . No doubt we live beyond ourselves in air, In an element that does not do for us, so well, that which we do for ourselves, too big, A thing not planned for imagery or belief, Not one of the masculine myths we used to make, A transparency through which the swallow weaves, Without any form or any sense of form, What we know in what we see, what we feel in what We hear, what we are, beyond mystic disputation, In the tumult of integrations out of the sky, And what we think, a breathing like the wind, A moving part of a motion, a discovery Part of a discovery, a change part of a change, A sharing of color and being part of it. The afternoon is visibly a source, Too wide, too irised, to be more than calm, Too much like thinking to be less than thought, Obscurest parent, obscurest patriarch, A daily majesty of meditation, That comes and goes in silences of its own. We think, then as the sun shines or does not. We think as wind skitters on a pond in a field Or we put mantles on our words because The same wind, rising and rising, makes a sound Like the last muting of winter as it ends. A new scholar replacing an older one reflects A moment on this fantasia. He seeks For a human that can be accounted for. The spirit comes from the body of the world, Or so Mr. Homburg thought: the body of a world Whose blunt laws make an affectation of mind, The mannerism of nature caught in a glass And there become a spirit's mannerism, A glass aswarm with things going as far as they can. A sunny day's complete Poussiniana Divide it from itself. It is this or that And it is not. By metaphor you paint A thing. Thus, the pineapple was a leather fruit, A fruit for pewter, thorned and palmed and blue, To be served by men of ice. The senses paint By metaphor. The juice was fragranter Than wettest cinnamon. It was cribled pears Dripping a morning sap. The truth must be That you do not see, you experience, you feel, That the buxom eye brings merely its element To the total thing, a shapeless giant forced Upward. Green were the curls upon that head. As the immense dew of Florida Brings forth The big-finned palm And green vine angering for life, As the immense dew of Florida Brings forth hymn and hymn From the beholder, Beholding all these green sides And gold sides of green sides, And blessed mornings, Meet for the eye of the young alligator, And lightning colors So, in me, comes flinging Forms, flames, and the flakes of flames. There is a great river this side of Stygia Before one comes to the first black cataracts And trees that lack the intelligence of trees. In that river, far this side of Stygia, The mere flowing of the water is a gayety, Flashing and flashing in the sun. On its banks, No shadow walks. The river is fateful, Like the last one. But there is no ferryman. He could not bend against its propelling force. It is not to be seen beneath the appearances That tell of it. The steeple at Farmington Stands glistening and Haddam shines and sways. It is the third commonness with light and air, A curriculum, a vigor, a local abstraction . . . Call it, one more, a river, an unnamed flowing, Space-filled, reflecting the seasons, the folk-lore Of each of the senses call it, again and again, The river that flows nowhere, like a sea. I Just as my fingers on these keys Make music, so the self-same sounds On my spirit make a music, too. Music is feeling, then, not sound And thus it is that what I feel, Here in this room, desiring you, Thinking of your blue-shadowed silk, Is music. It is like the strain Waked in the elders by Susanna Of a green evening, clear and warm, She bathed in her still garden, while The red-eyed elders, watching, felt The basses of their beings throb In witching chords, and their thin blood Pulse pizzicati of Hosanna. II In the green water, clear and warm, Susanna lay. She searched The touch of springs, And found Concealed imaginings. She sighed, For so much melody. Upon the bank, she stood In the cool Of spent emotions. She felt, among the leaves, The dew Of old devotions. She walked upon the grass, Still quavering. The winds were like her maids, On timid feet, Fetching her woven scarves, Yet wavering. A breath upon her hand Muted the night. She turned -- A cymbal crashed, Amid roaring horns. III Soon, with a noise like tambourines, Came her attendant Byzantines. They wondered why Susanna cried Against the elders by her side And as they whispered, the refrain Was like a willow swept by rain. Anon, their lamps' uplifted flame Revealed Susanna and her shame. And then, the simpering Byzantines Fled, with a noise like tambourines. IV Beauty is momentary in the mind -- The fitful tracing of a portal But in the flesh it is immortal. The body dies the body's beauty lives. So evenings die, in their green going, A wave, interminably flowing. So gardens die, their meek breath scenting The cowl of winter, done repenting. So maidens die, to the auroral Celebration of a maiden's choral. Susanna's music touched the bawdy strings Of those white elders but, escaping, Left only Death's ironic scraping. Now, in its immortality, it plays On the clear viol of her memory, And makes a constant sacrament of praise. I The World without Imagination Nota: man is the intelligence of his soil, The sovereign ghost. As such, the Socrates Of snails, musician of pears, principium And lex. Sed quaeritur: is this same wig Of things, this nincompated pedagogue, Preceptor to the sea? Crispin at sea Created, in his day, a touch of doubt. An eye most apt in gelatines and jupes, Berries of villages, a barber's eye, An eye of land, of simple salad-beds, Of honest quilts, the eye of Crispin, hung On porpoises, instead of apricots, And on silentious porpoises, whose snouts Dibbled in waves that were mustachios, Inscrutable hair in an inscrutable world. One eats one pat└, even of salt, quotha. It was not so much the lost terrestrial, The snug hibernal from that sea and salt, That century of wind in a single puff. What counted was mythology of self, Blotched out beyond unblotching. Crispin, The lutanist of fleas, the knave, the thane, The ribboned stick, the bellowing breeches, cloak Of China, cap of Spain, imperative haw Of hum, inquisitorial botanist, And general lexicographer of mute And maidenly greenhorns, now beheld himself, A skinny sailor peering in the sea-glass. What word split up in clickering syllables And storming under multitudinous tones Was name for this short-shanks in all that brunt? Crispin was washed away by magnitude. The whole of life that still remained in him Dwindled to one sound strumming in his ear, Ubiquitous concussion, slap and sigh, Polyphony beyond his baton's thrust. Could Crispin stem verboseness in the sea, The old age of a watery realist, Triton, dissolved in shifting diaphanes Of blue and green? A wordy, watery age That whispered to the sun's compassion, made A convocation, nightly, of the sea-stars, And on the cropping foot-ways of the moon Lay grovelling. Triton incomplicate with that Which made him Triton, nothing left of him, Except in faint, memorial gesturings, That were like arms and shoulders in the waves, Here, something in the rise and fall of wind That seemed hallucinating horn, and here, A sunken voice, both of remembering And of forgetfulness, in alternate strain. Just so an ancient Crispin was dissolved. The valet in the tempest was annulled. Bordeaux to Yucatan, Havana next, And then to Carolina. Simple jaunt. Crispin, merest minuscule in the gates, Dejected his manner to the turbulence. The salt hung on his spirit like a frost, The dead brine melted in him like a dew Of winter, until nothing of himself Remained, except some starker, barer self In a starker, barer world, in which the sun Was not the sun because it never shone With bland complaisance on pale parasols, Beetled, in chapels, on the chaste bouquets. Against his pipping sounds a trumpet cried Celestial sneering boisterously. Crispin Became an introspective voyager. Here was the veritable ding an sich, at last, Crispin confronting it, a vocable thing, But with a speech belched out of hoary darks Noway resembling his, a visible thing, And excepting negligible Triton, free From the unavoidable shadow of himself That lay elsewhere around him. Severance Was clear. The last distortion of romance Forsook the insatiable egotist. The sea Severs not only lands but also selves. Here was no help before reality. Crispin beheld and Crispin was made new. The imagination, here, could not evade, In poems of plums, the strict austerity Of one vast, subjugating, final tone. The drenching of stale lives no more fell down. What was this gaudy, gusty panoply? Out of what swift destruction did it spring? It was caparison of mind and cloud And something given to make whole among The ruses that were shattered by the large. II Concerning the Thunderstorms of Yucatan In Yucatan, the Maya sonneteers Of the Caribbean amphitheatre, In spite of hawk and falcon, green toucan And jay, still to the night-bird made their plea, As if raspberry tanagers in palms, High up in orange air, were barbarous. But Crispin was too destitute to find In any commonplace the sought-for aid. He was a man made vivid by the sea, A man come out of luminous traversing, Much trumpeted, made desperately clear, Fresh from discoveries of tidal skies, To whom oracular rockings gave no rest. Into a savage color he went on. How greatly had he grown in his demesne, This auditor of insects! He that saw The stride of vanishing autumn in a park By way of decorous melancholy he That wrote his couplet yearly to the spring, As dissertation of profound delight, Stopping, on voyage, in a land of snakes, Found his vicissitudes had much enlarged His apprehension, made him intricate In moody rucks, and difficult and strange In all desires, his destitution's mark. He was in this as other freemen are, Sonorous nutshells rattling inwardly. His violence was for aggrandizement And not for stupor, such as music makes For sleepers halfway waking. He perceived That coolness for his heat came suddenly, And only, in the fables that he scrawled With his own quill, in its indigenous dew, Of an aesthetic tough, diverse, untamed, Incredible to prudes, the mint of dirt, Green barbarism turning paradigm. Crispin foresaw a curious promenade Or, nobler, sensed an elemental fate, And elemental potencies and pangs, And beautiful barenesses as yet unseen, Making the most of savagery of palms, Of moonlight on the thick, cadaverous bloom That yuccas breed, and of the panther's tread. The fabulous and its intrinsic verse Came like two spirits parlaying, adorned In radiance from the Atlantic coign, For Crispin and his quill to catechize. But they came parlaying of such an earth, So thick with sides and jagged lops of green, So intertwined with serpent-kin encoiled Among the purple tufts, the scarlet crowns, Scenting the jungle in their refuges, So streaked with yellow, blue and green and red In beak and bud and fruity gobbet-skins, That earth was like a jostling festival Of seeds grown fat, too juicily opulent, Expanding in the gold's maternal warmth. So much for that. The affectionate emigrant found A new reality in parrot-squawks. Yet let that trifle pass. Now, as this odd Discoverer walked through the harbor streets Inspecting the cabildo, the fa?ade Of the cathedral, making notes, he heard A rumbling, west of Mexico, it seemed, Approaching like a gasconade of drums. The white cabildo darkened, the fa?ade, As sullen as the sky, was swallowed up In swift, successive shadows, dolefully. The rumbling broadened as it fell. The wind, Tempestuous clarion, with heavy cry, Came bluntly thundering, more terrible Than the revenge of music on bassoons. Gesticulating lightning, mystical, Made pallid flitter. Crispin, here, took flight. An annotator has his scruples, too. He knelt in the cathedral with the rest, This connoisseur of elemental fate, Aware of exquisite thought. The storm was one Of many proclamations of the kind, Proclaiming something harsher than he learned From hearing signboards whimper in cold nights Or seeing the midsummer artifice Of heat upon his pane. This was the span Of force, the quintessential fact, the note Of Vulcan, that a valet seeks to own, The thing that makes him envious in phrase. And while the torrent on the roof still droned He felt the Andean breath. His mind was free And more than free, elate, intent, profound And studious of a self possessing him, That was not in him in the crusty town From which he sailed. Beyond him, westward, lay The mountainous ridges, purple balustrades, In which the thunder, lapsing in its clap, Let down gigantic quavers of its voice, For Crispin to vociferate again. III Approaching Carolina The book of moonlight is not written yet Nor half begun, but, when it is, leave room For Crispin, fagot in the lunar fire, Who, in the hubbub of his pilgrimage Through sweating changes, never could forget That wakefulness or meditating sleep, In which the sulky strophes willingly Bore up, in time, the somnolent, deep songs. Leave room, therefore, in that unwritten book For the legendary moonlight that once burned In Crispin's mind above a continent. America was always north to him, A northern west or western north, but north, And thereby polar, polar-purple, chilled And lank, rising and slumping from a sea Of hardy foam, receding flatly, spread In endless ledges, glittering, submerged And cold in a boreal mistiness of the moon. The spring came there in clinking pannicles Of half-dissolving frost, the summer came, If ever, whisked and wet, not ripening, Before the winter's vacancy returned. The myrtle, if the myrtle ever bloomed, Was like a glacial pink upon the air. The green palmettoes in crepuscular ice Clipped frigidly blue-black meridians, Morose chiaroscuro, gauntly drawn. How many poems he denied himself In his observant progress, lesser things Than the relentless contact he desired How many sea-masks he ignored what sounds He shut out from his tempering ear what thoughts, Like jades affecting the sequestered bride And what descants, he sent to banishment! Perhaps the Arctic moonlight really gave The liaison, the blissful liaison, Between himself and his environment, Which was, and is, chief motive, first delight, For him, and not for him alone. It seemed Elusive, faint, more mist than moon, perverse, Wrong as a divagation to Peking, To him that postulated as his theme The vulgar, as his theme and hymn and flight, A passionately niggling nightingale. Moonlight was an evasion, or, if not, A minor meeting, facile, delicate. Thus he conceived his voyaging to be An up and down between two elements, A fluctuating between sun and moon, A sally into gold and crimson forms, As on this voyage, out of goblinry, And then retirement like a turning back And sinking down to the indulgences That in the moonlight have their habitude. But let these backward lapses, if they would, Grind their seductions on him, Crispin knew It was a flourishing tropic he required For his refreshment, an abundant zone, Prickly and obdurate, dense, harmonious Yet with a harmony not rarefied Nor fined for the inhibited instruments Of over-civil stops. And thus he tossed Between a Carolina of old time, A little juvenile, an ancient whim, And the visible, circumspect presentment drawn From what he saw across his vessel's prow. He came. The poetic hero without palms Or jugglery, without regalia. And as he came he saw that it was spring, A time abhorrent to the nihilist Or searcher for the fecund minimum. The moonlight fiction disappeared. The spring, Although contending featly in its veils, Irised in dew and early fragrancies, Was gemmy marionette to him that sought A sinewy nakedness. A river bore The vessel inward. Tilting up his nose, He inhaled the rancid rosin, burly smells Of dampened lumber, emanations blown From warehouse doors, the gustiness of ropes, Decays of sacks, and all the arrant stinks That helped him round his rude aesthetic out. He savored rankness like a sensualist. He marked the marshy ground around the dock, The crawling railroad spur, the rotten fence, Curriculum for the marvellous sophomore. It purified. It made him see how much Of what he saw he never saw at all. He gripped more closely the essential prose As being, in a world so falsified, The one integrity for him, the one Discovery still possible to make, To which all poems were incident, unless That prose should wear a poem's guise at last. IV The Idea of a Colony Nota: his soil is man's intelligence. That's better. That's worth crossing seas to find. Crispin in one laconic phrase laid bare His cloudy drift and planned a colony. Exit the mental moonlight, exit lex, Rex and principium, exit the whole Shebang. Exeunt omnes. Here was prose More exquisite than any tumbling verse: A still new continent in which to dwell. What was the purpose of his pilgrimage, Whatever shape it took in Crispin's mind, If not, when all is said, to drive away The shadow of his fellows from the skies, And, from their stale intelligence released, To make a new intelligence prevail? Hence the reverberations in the words Of his first central hymns, the celebrants Of rankest trivia, tests of the strength Of his aesthetic, his philosophy, The more invidious, the more desired. The florist asking aid from cabbages, The rich man going bare, the paladin Afraid, the blind man as astronomer, The appointed power unwielded from disdain. His western voyage ended and began. The torment of fastidious thought grew slack, Another, still more bellicose, came on. He, therefore, wrote his prolegomena, And, being full of the caprice, inscribed Commingled souvenirs and prophecies. He made a singular collation. Thus: The natives of the rain are rainy men. Although they paint effulgent, azure lakes, And April hillsides wooded white and pink, Their azure has a cloudy edge, their white And pink, the water bright that dogwood bears. And in their music showering sounds intone. On what strange froth does the gross Indian dote, What Eden sapling gum, what honeyed gore, What pulpy dram distilled of innocence, That streaking gold should speak in him Or bask within his images and words? If these rude instances impeach themselves By force of rudeness, let the principle Be plain. For application Crispin strove, Abhorring Turk as Esquimau, the lute As the marimba, the magnolia as rose. Upon these premises propounding, he Projected a colony that should extend To the dusk of a whistling south below the south. A comprehensive island hemisphere. The man in Georgia waking among pines Should be pine-spokesman. The responsive man, Planting his pristine cores in Florida, Should prick thereof, not on the psaltery, But on the banjo's categorical gut, Tuck tuck, while the flamingos flapped his bays. Sepulchral se?ors, bibbing pale mescal, Oblivious to the Aztec almanacs, Should make the intricate Sierra scan. And dark Brazilians in their caf└s, Musing immaculate, pampean dits, Should scrawl a vigilant anthology, To be their latest, lucent paramour. These are the broadest instances. Crispin, Progenitor of such extensive scope, Was not indifferent to smart detail. The melon should have apposite ritual, Performed in verd apparel, and the peach, When its black branches came to bud, belle day, Should have an incantation. And again, When piled on salvers its aroma steeped The summer, it should have a sacrament And celebration. Shrewd novitiates Should be the clerks of our experience. These bland excursions into time to come, Related in romance to backward flights, However prodigal, however proud, Contained in their afflatus the reproach That first drove Crispin to his wandering. He could not be content with counterfeit, With masquerade of thought, with hapless words That must belie the racking masquerade, With fictive flourishes that preordained His passion's permit, hang of coat, degree Of buttons, measure of his salt. Such trash Might help the blind, not him, serenely sly. It irked beyond his patience. Hence it was, Preferring text to gloss, he humbly served Grotesque apprenticeship to chance event, A clown, perhaps, but an aspiring clown. There is a monotonous babbling in our dreams That makes them our dependent heirs, the heirs Of dreamers buried in our sleep, and not The oncoming fantasies of better birth. The apprentice knew these dreamers. If he dreamed Their dreams, he did it in a gingerly way. All dreams are vexing. Let them be expunged. But let the rabbit run, the cock declaim. Trinket pasticcio, flaunting skyey sheets, With Crispin as the tiptoe cozener? No, no: veracious page on page, exact. V A Nice Shady Home Crispin as hermit, pure and capable, Dwelt in the land. Perhaps if discontent Had kept him still the pricking realist, Choosing his element from droll confect Of was and is and shall or ought to be, Beyond Bordeaux, beyond Havana, far Beyond carked Yucatan, he might have come To colonize his polar planterdom And jig his chits upon a cloudy knee. But his emprize to that idea soon sped. Crispin dwelt in the land and dwelling there Slid from his continent by slow recess To things within his actual eye, alert To the difficulty of rebellious thought When the sky is blue. The blue infected will. It may be that the yarrow in his fields Sealed pensive purple under its concern. But day by day, now this thing and now that Confined him, while it cosseted, condoned, Little by little, as if the suzerain soil Abashed him by carouse to humble yet Attach. It seemed haphazard denouement. He first, as realist, admitted that Whoever hunts a matinal continent May, after all, stop short before a plum And be content and still be realist. The words of things entangle and confuse. The plum survives its poems. It may hang In the sunshine placidly, colored by ground Obliquities of those who pass beneath, Harlequined and mazily dewed and mauved In bloom. Yet it survives in its own form, Beyond these changes, good, fat, guzzly fruit. So Crispin hasped on the surviving form, For him, of shall or ought to be in is. Was he to bray this in profoundest brass Arointing his dreams with fugal requiems? Was he to company vastest things defunct With a blubber of tom-toms harrowing the sky? Scrawl a tragedian's testament? Prolong His active force in an inactive dirge, Which, let the tall musicians call and call, Should merely call him dead? Pronounce amen Through choirs infolded to the outmost clouds? Because he built a cabin who once planned Loquacious columns by the ructive sea? Because he turned to salad-beds again? Jovial Crispin, in calamitous crape? Should he lay by the personal and make Of his own fate an instance of all fate? What is one man among so many men? What are so many men in such a world? Can one man think one thing and think it long? Can one man be one thing and be it long? The very man despising honest quilts Lies quilted to his poll in his despite. For realists, what is is what should be. And so it came, his cabin shuffled up, His trees were planted, his duenna brought Her prismy blonde and clapped her in his hands, The curtains flittered and the door was closed. Crispin, magister of a single room, Latched up the night. So deep a sound fell down It was as if the solitude concealed And covered him and his congenial sleep. So deep a sound fell down it grew to be A long soothsaying silence down and down. The crickets beat their tambours in the wind, Marching a motionless march, custodians. In the presto of the morning, Crispin trod, Each day, still curious, but in a round Less prickly and much more condign than that He once thought necessary. Like Candide, Yeoman and grub, but with a fig in sight, And cream for the fig and silver for the cream, A blonde to tip the silver and to taste The rapey gouts. Good star, how that to be Annealed them in their cabin ribaldries! Yet the quotidian saps philosophers And men like Crispin like them in intent, If not in will, to track the knaves of thought. But the quotidian composed as his, Of breakfast ribands, fruits laid in their leaves, The tomtit and the cassia and the rose, Although the rose was not the noble thorn Of crinoline spread, but of a pining sweet, Composed of evenings like cracked shutters flung Upon the rumpling bottomness, and nights In which those frail custodians watched, Indifferent to the tepid summer cold, While he poured out upon the lips of her That lay beside him, the quotidian Like this, saps like the sun, true fortuner. For all it takes it gives a humped return Exchequering from piebald fiscs unkeyed. VI And Daughters with Curls Portentous enunciation, syllable To blessed syllable affined, and sound Bubbling felicity in cantilene, Prolific and tormenting tenderness Of music, as it comes to unison, Forgather and bell boldly Crispin's last Deduction. Thrum, with a proud douceur His grand pronunciamento and devise. The chits came for his jigging, bluet-eyed, Hands without touch yet touching poignantly, Leaving no room upon his cloudy knee, Prophetic joint, for its diviner young. The return to social nature, once begun, Anabasis or slump, ascent or chute, Involved him in midwifery so dense His cabin counted as phylactery, Then place of vexing palankeens, then haunt Of children nibbling at the sugared void, Infants yet eminently old, then dome And halidom for the unbraided femes, Green crammers of the green fruits of the world, Bidders and biders for its ecstasies, True daughters both of Crispin and his clay. All this with many mulctings of the man, Effective colonizer sharply stopped In the door-yard by his own capacious bloom. But that this bloom grown riper, showing nibs Of its eventual roundness, puerile tints Of spiced and weathery rouges, should complex The stopper to indulgent fatalist Was unforeseen. First Crispin smiled upon His goldenest demoiselle, inhabitant, She seemed, of a country of the capuchins, So delicately blushed, so humbly eyed, Attentive to a coronal of things Secret and singular. Second, upon A second similar counterpart, a maid Most sisterly to the first, not yet awake Excepting to the motherly footstep, but Marvelling sometimes at the shaken sleep. Then third, a thing still flaxen in the light, A creeper under jaunty leaves. And fourth, Mere blusteriness that gewgaws jollified, All din and gobble, blasphemously pink. A few years more and the vermeil capuchin Gave to the cabin, lordlier than it was, The dulcet omen fit for such a house. The second sister dallying was shy To fetch the one full-pinioned one himself Out of her botches, hot embosomer. The third one gaping at the orioles Lettered herself demurely as became A pearly poetess, peaked for rhapsody. The fourth, pent now, a digit curious. Four daughters in a world too intricate In the beginning, four blithe instruments Of differing struts, four voices several In couch, four more person?, intimate As buffo, yet divers, four mirrors blue That should be silver, four accustomed seeds Hinting incredible hues, four self-same lights That spread chromatics in hilarious dark, Four questioners and four sure answerers. Crispin concocted doctrine from the rout. The world, a turnip once so readily plucked, Sacked up and carried overseas, daubed out Of its ancient purple, pruned to the fertile main, And sown again by the stiffest realist, Came reproduced in purple, family font, The same insoluble lump. The fatalist Stepped in and dropped the chuckling down his craw, Without grace or grumble. Score this anecdote Invented for its pith, not doctrinal In form though in design, as Crispin willed, Disguised pronunciamento, summary, Autumn's compendium, strident in itself But muted, mused, and perfectly revolved In those portentous accents, syllables, And sounds of music coming to accord Upon his law, like their inherent sphere, Seraphic proclamations of the pure Delivered with a deluging onwardness. Or if the music sticks, if the anecdote Is false, if Crispin is a profitless Philosopher, beginning with green brag, Concluding fadedly, if as a man Prone to distemper he abates in taste, Fickle and fumbling, variable, obscure, Glozing his life with after-shining flicks, Illuminating, from a fancy gorged By apparition, plain and common things, Sequestering the fluster from the year, Making gulped potions from obstreperous drops, And so distorting, proving what he proves Is nothing, what can all this matter since The relation comes, benignly, to its end? So may the relation of each man be clipped. In the Next Galaxy Things will be different. No one will lose their sight, their hearing, their gallbladder. It will be all Catskills with brand new wrap-around verandas. The idea of Hitler will not have vibrated yet. While back here, they are still cleaning out pockets of wrinkled Nazis hiding in Argentina. But in the next galaxy, certain planets will have true blue skies and drinking water. For me the great truths are laced with hysteria. How many Einsteins can we tolerate? I leap into the uncertainty principle. After so many smears, you want to wash it off with a laugh. Ha ha, you say. So what if it's a meltdown? Last lines to poems I will write immediately. Words make the thoughts. Severe tyrants, like the scrubbers and guardians of your cells. They herd your visions down the ramp to nexus waiting with sledge hammer to knock what is the knowing without knowing into knowledge. Yes, the tight bag of grammar, syntax, the clever sidestep from babble, is a comfortable prison. A mirror of the mirror. And all that is uttered in its chains is locked out from the secret. Wallace Stevens says, "A poet looks at the world as a man looks at a woman." I can never know what a man sees when he looks at a woman. That is a sealed universe. On the outside of the bubble everything is stretched to infinity. Along the blacktop, trees are bearded as old men, like rows of nodding gray-bearded mandarins. Their secondhand beards were spun by female gypsy moths. All mandarins are trapped in their images. A poet looks at the world as a woman looks at a man. It is spring when the storks return. They rise from storied roofs. In the quick winter afternoon you lie on your bed with a library book close to your face, your body on a single bed, and the storks rise with the sound of a lifted sash. You know without looking that a servant girl is leaning out in the soft foreign air. A slow spiral of smoke from green firewood is reflected in her eyes. She moves down an outside stair absently driving the poultry. The storks are standing on the roof. The girl wraps her hands in her apron. Small yellow flowers have clumped among the tussocks of coarse grass. She listens with her mouth open to something you cannot hear. Your body is asleep. She smiles. She does not know a cavalry is coming on a mud-rutted road, and men with minds like ferrets are stamping their heavy boots along the pages. This tedious letter to you, what is one Life to another? We walk around inside our bags, sucking it in, spewing it out. Then the insects, swarms heavier than all the animals of the world. Then the flycatchers on the clothesline, like seiners leaning from Flemish boats when the seas were roiled with herring. This long letter in my mind, calligraphy, feathery asparagus. Here is not exactly here because it passed by there two seconds ago where it will not come back. Although you adjust to this- it's nothing, you say, just the way it is. How poor we are, with all this running through our fingers. "Here," says the Devil, "Eat. It's Paradise." Writing poems about writing poems is like rolling bales of hay in Texas. Nothing but the horizon to stop you. But consider the railroad's edge of metal trash bird perches, miles of telephone wires. What is so innocent as grazing cattle? If you think about it, it turns into words. Trash is so cheerful flying up like grasshoppers in front of the reaper. The dust devil whirls it aloft bronze candy wrappers, squares of clear plastic--windows on a house of air. Below the weedy edge in last year's mat, red and silver beer cans. In bits blown equally everywhere, the gaiety of flying paper and the black high flung patterns of flocking birds. The abandoned campus, empty brick buildings and early June when you came to visit me crossing the states midway, the straggled belts of little roads hitchhiking with your portable typewriter. The campus, an academy of trees, under which some hand, the wind's I guess, had scattered the pale light of thousands of spring beauties, petals stained with pink veins secret, blooming for themselves. We sat among them. Your long fingers, thin body, and long bones of improbable genius some scattered gene as Kafka must have had. Your deep voice, this passing dust of miracles. That simple that was myself, half conscious, as though each moment was a page where words appeared the bent hammer of the type struck against the moving ribbon. The light air, the restless leaves the ripple of time warped by our longing. There, as if we were painted by some unknown impressionist. It is so hard to see where it is, but it is there even in the morning when the miracle of shapes assemble and become familiar, but not quite and the echo of a voice, now changed, utterly dissociated, as though all warmth and shared sweetness had never been. It is this alien space, not stark as the moon, but lush and almost identical to the space that was. But it is not. It is another place and you are not what you were but as though emerging from the air, you slowly show yourself as someone else, not ever remembered. A basket of dirty clothes spills all day long down the mountain beating the rocks with a horrible washer-woman's cry. Now two riders go by horseback on the dirt road. Young women talking of antique latches, blind to the dirty linen, smells of urine, bedsores, bowels of old women left on their backs, fat and lye, lies of doctoring men. Strange weather mid-summer is summer spent. I open a book of poems. All lies on the psalter, I say, the dead are silent. The riders come back chatting like birds. What would I not give to return that way. Their horses trot in a break of sunlight over the road. And I think, what's done is done. It won't be changed with words. When you come back to me it will be crow time and flycatcher time, with rising spirals of gnats between the apple trees. Every weed will be quadrupled, coarse, welcoming and spine-tipped. The crows, their black flapping bodies, their long calling toward the mountain relatives, like mine, ambivalent, eye-hooded hooting and tearing. And you will take me in to your fractal meaningless babble the quick of my mouth, the madness of my tongue. STRANGER! if you, passing, meet me, and desire to speak to me, why should you not speak to me? And why should I not speak to you? ONE¨S-SELF I sing！a simple, separate Person Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-masse. Of Physiology from top to toe I sing Not physiognomy alone, nor brain alone, is worthy for the muse！I say the Form complete is worthier far The Female equally with the male I sing. Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power, Cheerful！for freest action form¨d, under the laws divine, The Modern Man I sing. ON the beach, at night, Stands a child, with her father, Watching the east, the autumn sky. Up through the darkness, While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading, Lower, sullen and fast, athwart and down the sky, Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east, Ascends, large and calm, the lord-star Jupiter And nigh at hand, only a very little above, Swim the delicate brothers, the Pleiades. From the beach, the child, holding the hand of her father, Those burial-clouds that lower, victorious, soon to devour all, Watching, silently weeps. Weep not, child, Weep not, my darling, With these kisses let me remove your tears The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious, They shall not long possess the sky！shall devour the stars only in apparition: Jupiter shall emerge！be patient！watch again another night！the Pleiades shall emerge, They are immortal！all those stars, both silvery and golden, shall shine out again, The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again！they endure The vast immortal suns, and the long-enduring pensive moons, shall again shine. Then, dearest child, mournest thou only for Jupiter? Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars? Something there is, (With my lips soothing thee, adding, I whisper, I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,) Something there is more immortal even than the stars, (Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,) Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter, Longer than sun, or any revolving satellite, Or the radiant brothers, the Pleiades. O CAPTAIN! my Captain! our fearful trip is done The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting, While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring: But O heart! heart! heart! O the bleeding drops of red, Where on the deck my Captain lies, Fallen cold and dead. O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells Rise up-for you the flag is flung-for you the bugle trills For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths-for you the shores a-crowding For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning Here Captain! dear father! This arm beneath your head It is some dream that on the deck, You've fallen cold and dead. My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done From fearful trip, the victor ship, comes in with object won Exult, O shores, and ring, O bells! But I, with mournful tread, Walk the deck my Captain lies, Fallen cold and dead. O ME! O life!... of the questions of these recurring Of the endless trains of the faithless！of cities fill¨d with the foolish Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I, and who more faithless?) Of eyes that vainly crave the light！of the objects mean！of the struggle ever renew¨d Of the poor results of all！of the plodding and sordid crowds I see around me Of the empty and useless years of the rest！with the rest me intertwined The question, O me! so sad, recurring！What good amid these, O me, O life? Answer. That you are here！that life exists, and identity That the powerful play goes on, and you will contribute a verse. AS I ponder¨d in silence, Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long, A Phantom arose before me, with distrustful aspect, Terrible in beauty, age, and power, The genius of poets of old lands, As to me directing like flame its eyes, With finger pointing to many immortal songs, And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said Know¨st thou not, there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards? And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles, The making of perfect soldiers? Be it so, then I answer¨d, I too, haughty Shade, also sing war！and a longer and greater one than any, Waged in my book with varying fortune！with flight, advance, and retreat！Victory deferr¨d and wavering, (Yet, methinks, certain, or as good as certain, at the last,)！The field the world For life and death！for the Body, and for the eternal Soul, Lo! too am come, chanting the chant of battles, I, above all, promote brave soldiers. WHOEVER you are, I fear you are walking the walks of dreams, I fear these supposed realities are to melt from under your feet and hands Even now, your features, joys, speech, house, trade, manners, troubles, follies, costume, crimes, dissipate away from you, Your true Soul and Body appear before me, They stand forth out of affairs！out of commerce, shops, law, science, work, forms, clothes, the house, medicine, print, buying, selling, eating, drinking, suffering, dying. Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you, that you be my poem I whisper with my lips close to your ear, I have loved many women and men, but I love none better than you. O I have been dilatory and dumb I should have made my way straight to you long ago I should have blabb¨d nothing but you, I should have chanted nothing but you. I will leave all, and come and make the hymns of you None have understood you, but I understand you None have done justice to you！you have not done justice to yourself None but have found you imperfect！I only find no imperfection in you None but would subordinate you！I only am he who will never consent to subordinate you I only am he who places over you no master, owner, better, God, beyond what waits intrinsically in yourself. Painters have painted their swarming groups, and the centre figure of all From the head of the centre figure spreading a nimbus of gold-color¨d light But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head without its nimbus of gold-color¨d light From my hand, from the brain of every man and woman it streams, effulgently flowing forever. O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you! You have not known what you are！you have slumber¨d upon yourself all your life Your eye-lids have been the same as closed most of the time What you have done returns already in mockeries (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return in mockeries, what is their return?) The mockeries are not you Underneath them, and within them, I see you lurk I pursue you where none else has pursued you Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night, the accustom¨d routine, if these conceal you from others, or from yourself, they do not conceal you from me The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if these balk others, they do not balk me, The pert apparel, the deform¨d attitude, drunkenness, greed, premature death, all these I part aside. There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you There is no virtue, no beauty, in man or woman, but as good is in you No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you. As for me, I give nothing to any one, except I give the like carefully to you I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner than I sing the songs of the glory of you. Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard! These shows of the east and west are tame, compared to you These immense meadows！these interminable rivers！you are immense and interminable as they These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature, throes of apparent dissolution！you are he or she who is master or mistress over them, Master or mistress in your own right over Nature, elements, pain, passion, dissolution. The hopples fall from your ankles！you find an unfailing sufficiency Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest, whatever you are promulges itself Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are provided, nothing is scanted Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui, what you are picks its way. FOR him I sing, (As some perennial tree, out of its roots, the present on the past:) With time and space I him dilate！and fuse the immortal laws, To make himself, by them, the law unto himself. I CELEBRATE myself And what I assume you shall assume For every atom belonging to me, as good belongs to you. I loafe and invite my Soul I lean and loafe at my ease, observing a spear of summer grass. Houses and rooms are full of perfumes！the shelves are crowded with perfumes I breathe the fragrance myself, and know it and like it The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it. The atmosphere is not a perfume！it has no taste of the distillation！it is odorless It is for my mouth forever！I am in love with it I will go to the bank by the wood, and become undisguised and naked I am mad for it to be in contact with me. The smoke of my own breath Echoes, ripples, buzz¨d whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing of blood and air through my lungs The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore, and dark-color¨d sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn The sound of the belch¨d words of my voice, words loos¨d to the eddies of the wind A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag The delight alone, or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields and hill-sides The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising from bed and meeting the sun. Have you reckon¨d a thousand acres much? have you reckon¨d the earth much? Have you practis¨d so long to learn to read? Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems? Stop this day and night with me, and you shall possess the origin of all poems You shall possess the good of the earth and sun！(there are millions of suns left) You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me: You shall listen to all sides, and filter them from yourself. I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the beginning and the end But I do not talk of the beginning or the end. There was never any more inception than there is now, Nor any more youth or age than there is now And will never be any more perfection than there is now, Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now. Urge, and urge, and urge Always the procreant urge of the world. Out of the dimness opposite equals advance！always substance and increase, always sex Always a knit of identity！always distinction！always a breed of life. To elaborate is no avail！learn¨d and unlearn¨d feel that it is so. Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well entretied, braced in the beams, Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical, I and this mystery, here we stand. Clear and sweet is my Soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my Soul. Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen, Till that becomes unseen, and receives proof in its turn. Showing the best, and dividing it from the worst, age vexes age Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself. Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean Not an inch, nor a particle of an inch, is vile, and none shall be less familiar than the rest. I am satisfied！I see, dance, laugh, sing: As the hugging and loving Bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night, and withdraws at the peep of the day, with stealthy tread, Leaving me baskets cover¨d with white towels, swelling the house with their plenty, Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization, and scream at my eyes, That they turn from gazing after and down the road, And forthwith cipher and show me a cent, Exactly the contents of one, and exactly the contents of two, and which is ahead? Trippers and askers surround me People I meet！the effect upon me of my early life, or the ward and city I live in, or the nation, The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new, My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues, The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love, The sickness of one of my folks, or of myself, or ill-doing, or loss or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news, the fitful events These come to me days and nights, and go from me again, But they are not the Me myself. Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest, Looking with side-curved head, curious what will come next Both in and out of the game, and watching and wondering at it. Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with linguists and contenders I have no mockings or arguments！I witness and wait. I believe in you, my Soul！the other I am must not abase itself to you And you must not be abased to the other. Loafe with me on the grass！loose the stop from your throat Not words, not music or rhyme I want！not custom or lecture, not even the best Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice. I mind how once we lay, such a transparent summer morning How you settled your head athwart my hips, and gently turn¨d over upon me, And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue to my bare-stript heart, And reach¨d till you felt my beard, and reach¨d till you held my feet. Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass all the argument of the earth And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own, And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women my sisters and lovers And that a kelson of the creation is love And limitless are leaves, stiff or drooping in the fields And brown ants in the little wells beneath them And mossy scabs of the worm fence, and heap¨d stones, elder, mullen and poke-weed. A child said, What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is, any more than he. I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green stuff woven. Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord, A scented gift and remembrancer, designedly dropt, Bearing the owner¨s name someway in the corners, that we may see and remark, and say, Whose? Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation. Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones, Growing among black folks as among white Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I receive them the same. And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves. Tenderly will I use you, curling grass It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men It may be if I had known them I would have loved them It may be you are from old people, and from women, and from offspring taken soon out of their mothers¨ laps And here you are the mothers¨ laps. This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers Darker than the colorless beards of old men Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths. O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues! And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing. I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women, And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken soon out of their laps. What do you think has become of the young and old men? And what do you think has become of the women and children? They are alive and well somewhere The smallest sprout shows there is really no death And if ever there was, it led forward life, and does not wait at the end to arrest it, And ceas¨d the moment life appear¨d. All goes onward and outward！nothing collapses And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier. Has any one supposed it lucky to be born? I hasten to inform him or her, it is just as lucky to die, and I know it. I pass death with the dying, and birth with the new-wash¨d babe, and am not contain¨d between my hat and boots And peruse manifold objects, no two alike, and every one good The earth good, and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good. I am not an earth, nor an adjunct of an earth I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and fathomless as myself (They do not know how immortal, but I know.) Every kind for itself and its own！for me mine, male and female For me those that have been boys, and that love women For me the man that is proud, and feels how it stings to be slighted For me the sweet-heart and the old maid！for me mothers, and the mothers of mothers For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears For me children, and the begetters of children. Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale, nor discarded I see through the broadcloth and gingham, whether or no And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away. The little one sleeps in its cradle I lift the gauze, and look a long time, and silently brush away flies with my hand. The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill I peeringly view them from the top. The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bed-room I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair！I note where the pistol has fallen. The blab of the pave, the tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of the promenaders The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the clank of the shod horses on the granite floor The snow-sleighs, the clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snowballs The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous¨d mobs The flap of the curtain¨d litter, a sick man inside, borne to the hospital The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall The excited crowd, the policeman with his star, quickly working his passage to the centre of the crowd The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes What groans of over-fed or half-starv¨d who fall sun-struck, or in fits What exclamations of women taken suddenly, who hurry home and give birth to babes What living and buried speech is always vibrating here！what howls restrain¨d by decorum Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances, rejections with convex lips I mind them or the show or resonance of them！I come, and I depart. The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged The armfuls are pack¨d to the sagging mow. I am there！I help！I came stretch¨d atop of the load I felt its soft jolts！one leg reclined on the other I jump from the cross-beams, and seize the clover and timothy, And roll head over heels, and tangle my hair full of wisps. Alone, far in the wilds and mountains, I hunt, Wandering, amazed at my own lightness and glee In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night, Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill¨d game Falling asleep on the gather¨d leaves, with my dog and gun by my side. The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails！she cuts the sparkle and scud My eyes settle the land！I bend at her prow, or shout joyously from the deck. The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me I tuck¨d my trowser-ends in my boots, and went and had a good time: (You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.) I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west！the bride was a red girl Her father and his friends sat near, cross-legged and dumbly smoking！they had moccasins to their feet, and large thick blankets hanging from their shoulders On a bank lounged the trapper！he was drest mostly in skins！his luxuriant beard and curls protected his neck！he held his bride by the hand She had long eyelashes！her head was bare！her coarse straight locks descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach¨d to her feet. The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak, And went where he sat on a log, and led him in and assured him, And brought water, and fill¨d a tub for his sweated body and bruis¨d feet, And gave him a room that enter¨d from my own, and gave him some coarse clean clothes, And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness, And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass¨d north (I had him sit next me at table！my fire-lock lean¨d in the corner.) Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore Twenty-eight young men, and all so friendly: Twenty-eight years of womanly life, and all so lonesome. She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank She hides, handsome and richly drest, aft the blinds of the window. Which of the young men does she like the best? Ah, the homeliest of them is beautiful to her. Where are you off to, lady? for I see you You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room. Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them. The beards of the young men glisten¨d with wet, it ran from their long hair: Little streams pass¨d all over their bodies. An unseen hand also pass¨d over their bodies It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs. The young men float on their backs！their white bellies bulge to the sun！they do not ask who seizes fast to them They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch They do not think whom they souse with spray. The butcher-boy puts off his killing clothes, or sharpens his knife at the stall in the market I loiter, enjoying his repartee, and his shuffle and break-down. Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil Each has his main-sledge！they are all out！(there is a great heat in the fire.) From the cinder-strew¨d threshold I follow their movements The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms Over-hand the hammers swing！over-hand so slow！over-hand so sure: They do not hasten！each man hits in his place. The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses！the block swags underneath on its tied-over chain The negro that drives the dray of the stone-yard！steady and tall he stands, pois¨d on one leg on the string-piece His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast, and loosens over his hip-band His glance is calm and commanding！he tosses the slouch of his hat away from his forehead The sun falls on his crispy hair and moustache！falls on the black of his polish¨d and perfect limbs. I behold the picturesque giant, and love him！and I do not stop there I go with the team also. In me the caresser of life wherever moving！backward as well as forward slueing To niches aside and junior bending. Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain, or halt in the leafy shade! what is that you express in your eyes? It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life. My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck, on my distant and day-long ramble They rise together！they slowly circle around. I believe in those wing¨d purposes, And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me, And consider green and violet, and the tufted crown, intentional And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me. The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night Ya-honk! he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation (The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listen close I find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.) The sharp-hoof¨d moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the chickadee, the prairie-dog, The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats, The brood of the turkey-hen, and she with her half-spread wings I see in them and myself the same old law. The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections They scorn the best I can do to relate them. I am enamour¨d of growing out-doors, Of men that live among cattle, or taste of the ocean or woods, Of the builders and steerers of ships, and the wielders of axes and mauls, and the drivers of horses I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out. What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me Not asking the sky to come down to my good will Scattering it freely forever. The pure contralto sings in the organ loft The carpenter dresses his plank！the tongue of his foreplane whistles its wild ascending lisp The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner The pilot seizes the king-pin！he heaves down with a strong arm The mate stands braced in the whale-boat！lance and harpoon are ready The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches The deacons are ordain¨d with cross¨d hands at the altar The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel The farmer stops by the bars, as he walks on a First-day loafe, and looks at the oats and rye The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum, a confirm¨d case, (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother¨s bed-room) The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case, He turns his quid of tobacco, while his eyes blurr with the manuscript The malform¨d limbs are tied to the surgeon¨s table, What is removed drops horribly in a pail The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand！the drunkard nods by the bar-room stove The machinist rolls up his sleeves！the policeman travels his beat！the gate-keeper marks who pass The young fellow drives the express-wagon！(I love him, though I do not know him) The half-breed straps on his light boots to complete in the race The western turkey-shooting draws old and young！some lean on their rifles, some sit on logs, Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them from his saddle The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their partners, the dancers bow to each other The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof¨d garret, and harks to the musical rain The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron The squaw, wrapt in her yellow-hemm¨d cloth, is offering moccasins and bead-bags for sale The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut eyes bent sideways As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat, the plank is thrown for the shore-going passengers The young sister holds out the skein, while the elder sister winds it off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots The one-year wife is recovering and happy, having a week ago borne her first child The clean-hair¨d Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine, or in the factory or mill The nine months¨ gone is in the parturition chamber, her faintness and pains are advancing The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer！the reporter¨s lead flies swiftly over the note-book！the sign-painter is lettering with red and gold The canal boy trots on the tow-path！the book-keeper counts at his desk！the shoemaker waxes his thread The conductor beats time for the band, and all the performers follow him The child is baptized！the convert is making his first professions The regatta is spread on the bay！the race is begun！how the white sails sparkle! The drover, watching his drove, sings out to them that would stray The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling about the odd cent) The camera and plate are prepared, the lady must sit for her daguerreotype The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock moves slowly The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open¨d lips The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and pimpled neck The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to each other (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths, nor jeer you) The President, holding a cabinet council, is surrounded by the Great Secretaries On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold The Missourian crosses the plains, toting his wares and his cattle As the fare-collector goes through the train, he gives notice by the jingling of loose change The floor-men are laying the floor！the tinners are tinning the roof！the masons are calling for mortar In single file, each shouldering his hod, pass onward the laborers Seasons pursuing each other, the indescribable crowd is gather¨d！it is the Fourth of Seventh-month！(What salutes of cannon and small arms!) Seasons pursuing each other, the plougher ploughs, the mower mows, and the winter-grain falls in the ground Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in the frozen surface The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep with his axe Flatboatmen make fast, towards dusk, near the cottonwood or pekan-trees Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river, or through those drain¨d by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansaw Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahoochee or Altamahaw Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons around them In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after their day¨s sport The city sleeps, and the country sleeps The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time The old husband sleeps by his wife, and the young husband sleeps by his wife And these one and all tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them And such as it is to be of these, more or less, I am. I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise Regardless of others, ever regardful of others, Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man, Stuff¨d with the stuff that is coarse, and stuff¨d with the stuff that is fine One of the Great Nation, the nation of many nations, the smallest the same, and the largest the same A southerner soon as a northerner！a planter nonchalant and hospitable, down by the Oconee I live A Yankee, bound by my own way, ready for trade, my joints the limberest joints on earth, and the sternest joints on earth A Kentuckian, walking the vale of the Elkhorn, in my deer-skin leggings！a Louisianian or Georgian A boatman over lakes or bays, or along coasts！a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye At home on Kanadian snow-shoes, or up in the bush, or with fishermen off Newfoundland At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking At home on the hills of Vermont, or in the woods of Maine, or the Texan ranch Comrade of Californians！comrade of free north-westerners, (loving their big proportions) Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen！comrade of all who shake hands and welcome to drink and meat A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest A novice beginning, yet experient of myriads of seasons Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker A prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest. I resist anything better than my own diversity I breathe the air, but leave plenty after me, And am not stuck up, and am in my place. (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place The suns I see, and the suns I cannot see, are in their place The palpable is in its place, and the impalpable is in its place.) These are the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands！they are not original with me If they are not yours as much as mine, they are nothing, or next to nothing If they are not the riddle, and the untying of the riddle, they are nothing If they are not just as close as they are distant, they are nothing. This is the grass that grows wherever the land is, and the water is This is the common air that bathes the globe. With music strong I come！with my cornets and my drums, I play not marches for accepted victors only！I play great marches for conquer¨d and slain persons. Have you heard that it was good to gain the day? I also say it is good to fall！battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won. I beat and pound for the dead I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them. Vivas to those who have fail¨d! And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea! And to those themselves who sank in the sea! And to all generals that lost engagements! and all overcome heroes! And the numberless unknown heroes, equal to the greatest heroes known. This is the meal equally set！this is the meat for natural hunger It is for the wicked just the same as the righteous！I make appointments with all I will not have a single person slighted or left away The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited The heavy-lipp¨d slave is invited！the venerealee is invited: There shall be no difference between them and the rest. This is the press of a bashful hand！this is the float and odor of hair This is the touch of my lips to yours！this is the murmur of yearning This is the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face This is the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again. Do you guess I have some intricate purpose? Well, I have！for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the side of a rock has. Do you take it I would astonish? Does the daylight astonish? Does the early redstart, twittering through the woods? Do I astonish more than they? This hour I tell things in confidence I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you. Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat? What is a man, anyhow? What am I? What are you? All I mark as my own, you shall offset it with your own Else it were time lost listening to me. I do not snivel that snivel the world over, That months are vacuums, and the ground but wallow and filth That life is a suck and a sell, and nothing remains at the end but threadbare crape, and tears. Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids！conformity goes to the fourth-remov¨d I wear my hat as I please, indoors or out. Why should I pray? Why should I venerate and be ceremonious? Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsell¨d with doctors, and calculated close, I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones. In all people I see myself！none more, and not one a barleycorn less And the good or bad I say of myself, I say of them. And I know I am solid and sound To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means. I know I am deathless I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by the carpenter¨s compass I know I shall not pass like a child¨s carlacue cut with a burnt stick at night. I know I am august I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood I see that the elementary laws never apologize (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by, after all.) I exist as I am！that is enough If no other in the world be aware, I sit content And if each and all be aware, I sit content. One world is aware, and by far the largest to me, and that is myself And whether I come to my own to-day, or in ten thousand or ten million years, I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait. My foothold is tenon¨d and mortis¨d in granite I laugh at what you call dissolution And I know the amplitude of time. I am the poet of the Body And I am the poet of the Soul. The pleasures of heaven are with me, and the pains of hell are with me The first I graft and increase upon myself！the latter I translate into a new tongue. I am the poet of the woman the same as the man And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men. I chant the chant of dilation or pride We have had ducking and deprecating about enough I show that size is only development. Have you outstript the rest? Are you the President? It is a trifle！they will more than arrive there, every one, and still pass on. I am he that walks with the tender and growing night I call to the earth and sea, half-held by the night. Press close, bare-bosom¨d night! Press close, magnetic, nourishing night! Night of south winds! night of the large few stars! Still, nodding night! mad, naked, summer night. Smile, O voluptuous, cool-breath¨d earth! Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees Earth of departed sunset! earth of the mountains, misty-topt! Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon, just tinged with blue! Earth of shine and dark, mottling the tide of the river! Earth of the limpid gray of clouds, brighter and clearer for my sake! Far-swooping elbow¨d earth! rich, apple-blossom¨d earth! Smile, for your lover comes! Prodigal, you have given me love! Therefore I to you give love! O unspeakable, passionate love! You sea! I resign myself to you also！I guess what you mean I behold from the beach your crooked inviting fingers I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me We must have a turn together！I undress！hurry me out of sight of the land Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse Dash me with amorous wet！I can repay you. Sea of stretch¨d ground-swells! Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths! Sea of the brine of life! sea of unshovell¨d yet always-ready graves! Howler and scooper of storms! capricious and dainty sea! I am integral with you！I too am of one phase, and of all phases. Partaker of influx and efflux I！extoller of hate and conciliation Extoller of amies, and those that sleep in each others¨ arms. I am he attesting sympathy (Shall I make my list of things in the house, and skip the house that supports them?) I am not the poet of goodness only！I do not decline to be the poet of wickedness also. Washes and razors for foofoos！for me freckles and a bristling beard. What blurt is this about virtue and about vice? Evil propels me, and reform of evil propels me！I stand indifferent My gait is no fault-finder¨s or rejecter¨s gait I moisten the roots of all that has grown. Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy? Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work¨d over and rectified? I find one side a balance, and the antipodal side a balance Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine Thoughts and deeds of the present, our rouse and early start. This minute that comes to me over the past decillions, There is no better than it and now. What behaved well in the past, or behaves well to-day, is not such a wonder The wonder is, always and always, how there can be a mean man or an infidel. Endless unfolding of words of ages! And mine a word of the modern！the word En-Masse. A word of the faith that never balks Here or henceforward, it is all the same to me！I accept Time, absolutely. It alone is without flaw！it rounds and completes all That mystic, baffling wonder I love, alone completes all. I accept reality, and dare not question it Materialism first and last imbuing. Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration! Fetch stonecrop, mixt with cedar and branches of lilac This is the lexicographer！this the chemist！this made a grammar of the old cartouches These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas This is the geologist！this works with the scalpel！and this is a mathematician. Gentlemen! to you the first honors always: Your facts are useful and real！and yet they are not my dwelling (I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.) Less the reminders of properties told, my words And more the reminders, they, of life untold, and of freedom and extrication, And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and women fully equipt, And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives, and them that plot and conspire. Walt Whitman am I, a Kosmos, of mighty Manhattan the son, Turbulent, fleshy and sensual, eating, drinking and breeding No sentimentalist！no stander above men and women, or apart from them No more modest than immodest. Unscrew the locks from the doors! Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs! Whoever degrades another degrades me And whatever is done or said returns at last to me. Through me the afflatus surging and surging！through me the current and index. I speak the pass-word primeval！I give the sign of democracy By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their counterpart of on the same terms. Through me many long dumb voices Voices of the interminable generations of slaves Voices of prostitutes, and of deform¨d persons Voices of the diseas¨d and despairing, and of thieves and dwarfs Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion, And of the threads that connect the stars！and of wombs, and of the father-stuff, And of the rights of them the others are down upon Of the trivial, flat, foolish, despised, Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung. Through me forbidden voices Voice of sexes and lusts！voices veil¨d, and I remove the veil Voices indecent, by me clarified and transfigur¨d. I do not press my fingers across my mouth I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart Copulation is no more rank to me than death is. I believe in the flesh and the appetites Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me is a miracle. Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am touch¨d from The scent of these arm-pits, aroma finer than prayer This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds. If I worship one thing more than another, it shall be the spread of my own body, or any part of it. Translucent mould of me, it shall be you! Shaded ledges and rests, it shall be you! Firm masculine colter, it shall be you. Whatever goes to the tilth of me, it shall be you! You my rich blood! Your milky stream, pale strippings of my life. Breast that presses against other breasts, it shall be you! My brain, it shall be your occult convolutions. Root of wash¨d sweet flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded duplicate eggs! it shall be you! Mix¨d tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you! Trickling sap of maple! fibre of manly wheat! it shall be you! Sun so generous, it shall be you! Vapors lighting and shading my face, it shall be you! You sweaty brooks and dews, it shall be you! Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me, it shall be you! Broad, muscular fields! branches of live oak! loving lounger in my winding paths! it shall be you! Hands I have taken！face I have kiss¨d！mortal I have ever touch¨d! it shall be you. I dote on myself！there is that lot of me, and all so luscious Each moment, and whatever happens, thrills me with joy. O I am wonderful! I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the friendship I take again. That I walk up my stoop! I pause to consider if it really be A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics of books. To behold the day-break! The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows The air tastes good to my palate. Hefts of the moving world, at innocent gambols, silently rising, freshly exuding, Scooting obliquely high and low. Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven. The earth by the sky staid with！the daily close of their junction The heav¨d challenge from the east that moment over my head The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master! Dazzling and tremendous, how quick the sun-rise would kill me, If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me. We also ascend, dazzling and tremendous as the sun We found our own, O my Soul, in the calm and cool of the daybreak. My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds, and volumes of worlds. Speech is the twin of my vision！it is unequal to measure itself It provokes me forever It says sarcastically, Walt, you contain enough！why don¨t you let it out, then? Come now, I will not be tantalized！you conceive too much of articulation. Do you not know, O speech, how the buds beneath you are folded? Waiting in gloom, protected by frost The dirt receding before my prophetical screams I underlying causes, to balance them at last My knowledge my live parts！it keeping tally with the meaning of things, HAPPINESS！which, whoever hears me, let him or her set out in search of this day. My final merit I refuse you！I refuse putting from me what I really am Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you. Writing and talk do not prove me I carry the plenum of proof, and everything else, in my face With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic. I think I will do nothing now but listen, To accrue what I hear into myself！to let sounds contribute toward me. I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames, clack of sticks cooking my meals I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following Sounds of the city, and sounds out of the city！sounds of the day and night Talkative young ones to those that like them！the loud laugh of work-people at their meals The angry base of disjointed friendship！the faint tones of the sick The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing a death-sentence The heave¨e¨yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves！the refrain of the anchor-lifters The ring of alarm-bells！the cry of fire！the whirr of swift-streaking engines and hose-carts, with premonitory tinkles, and color¨d lights The steam-whistle！the solid roll of the train of approaching cars The slow-march play¨d at the head of the association, marching two and two, (They go to guard some corpse！the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.) I hear the violoncello (¨tis the young man¨s heart¨s complaint) I hear the key¨d cornet！it glides quickly in through my ears It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast. I hear the chorus！it is a grand opera Ah, this indeed is music! This suits me. A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full. I hear the train¨d soprano！(what work, with hers, is this?) The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies It wrenches such ardors from me, I did not know I possess¨d them It sails me！I dab with bare feet！they are lick¨d by the indolent waves I am exposed, cut by bitter and angry hail！I lose my breath, Steep¨d amid honey¨d morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles, And that we call BEING. To be, in any form！what is that? (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither) If nothing lay more develop¨d, the quahaug in its callous shell were enough. Mine is no callous shell I have instant conductors all over me, whether I pass or stop They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me. I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy To touch my person to some one else¨s is about as much as I can stand. Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity, Flames and ether making a rush for my veins, Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them, My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly different from myself On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs, Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip, Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial, Depriving me of my best, as for a purpose, Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist, Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields, Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away, They bribed to swap off with touch, and go and graze at the edges of me No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while, Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me. The sentries desert every other part of me They have left me helpless to a red marauder They all come to the headland, to witness and assist against me. I am given up by traitors I talk wildly！I have lost my wits！I and nobody else am the greatest traitor I went myself first to the headland！my own hands carried me there. You villian touch! what are you doing? My breath is tight in its throat Unclench your floodgates! you are too much for me. Blind, loving, wrestling touch! sheath¨d, hooded, sharp-tooth¨d touch! Did it make you ache so, leaving me? Parting, track¨d by arriving！perpetual payment of perpetual loan Rich, showering rain, and recompense richer afterward. Sprouts take and accumulate！stand by the curb prolific and vital: Landscapes, projected, masculine, full-sized and golden. All truths wait in all things They neither hasten their own delivery, nor resist it They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon The insignificant is as big to me as any (What is less or more than a touch?) Logic and sermons never convince The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul. Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so Only what nobody denies is so. A minute and a drop of me settle my brain I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps, And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman, And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other, And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it becomes omnific, And until every one shall delight us, and we them. I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey-work of the stars, And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg of the wren, And the tree-toad is a chef-d¨oeuvre for the highest, And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven, And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery, And the cow crunching with depress¨d head surpasses any statue, And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels, And I could come every afternoon of my life to look at the farmer¨s girl boiling her iron tea-kettle and baking shortcake. I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits, grains, esculent roots, And am stucco¨d with quadrupeds and birds all over, And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons, And call anything close again, when I desire it. In vain the speeding or shyness In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder¨d bones In vain objects stand leagues off, and assume manifold shapes In vain the ocean settling in hollows, and the great monsters lying low In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods In vain the razor-bill¨d auk sails far north to Labrador I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff. I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and self-contain¨d I stand and look at them long and long. They do not sweat and whine about their condition They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God Not one is dissatisfied！not one is demented with the mania of owning things Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of years ago Not one is respectable or industrious over the whole earth. So they show their relations to me, and I accept them They bring me tokens of myself！they evince them plainly in their possession. I wonder where they get those tokens: Did I pass that way huge times ago, and negligently drop them? Myself moving forward then and now and forever, Gathering and showing more always and with velocity, Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms. A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses, Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears, Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground, Eyes full of sparkling wickedness！ears finely cut, flexibly moving. His nostrils dilate, as my heels embrace him His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure, as we race around and return. I but use you a moment, then I resign you, stallion Why do I need your paces, when I myself out-gallop them? Even, as I stand or sit, passing faster than you. O swift wind! O space and time! now I see it is true, what I guessed at What I guess¨d when I loaf¨d on the grass What I guess¨d while I lay alone in my bed, And again as I walk¨d the beach under the paling stars of the morning. My ties and ballasts leave me！I travel！I sail！my elbows rest in the sea-gaps I skirt the sierras！my palms cover continents I am afoot with my vision. By the city¨s quadrangular houses！in log huts！camping with lumbermen Along the ruts of the turnpike！along the dry gulch and rivulet bed Weeding my onion-patch, or hoeing rows of carrots and parsnips！crossing savannas！trailing in forests Prospecting！gold-digging！girdling the trees of a new purchase Scorch¨d ankle-deep by the hot sand！hauling my boat down the shallow river Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead！where the buck turns furiously at the hunter Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock！where the otter is feeding on fish Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey！where the beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tail Over the growing sugar！over the yellow-flower¨d cotton plant！over the rice in its low moist field Over the sharp-peak¨d farm house, with its scallop¨d scum and slender shoots from the gutters Over the western persimmon！over the long-leav¨d corn！over the delicate blue-flower flax Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with the rest Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low scragged limbs Walking the path worn in the grass, and beat through the leaves of the brush Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve！where the great gold-bug drops through the dark Where flails keep time on the barn floor Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to the meadow Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous shuddering of their hides Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen！where andirons straddle the hearth-slab！where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters Where trip-hammers crash！where the press is whirling its cylinders Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it myself, and looking composedly down) Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose！where the heat hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand Where the she-whale swims with her calf, and never forsakes it Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out of the water Where the half-burn¨d brig is riding on unknown currents, Where shells grow to her slimy deck！where the dead are corrupting below Where the dense-starr¨d flag is borne at the head of the regiments Approaching Manhattan, up by the long-stretching island Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance Upon a door-step！upon the horse-block of hard wood outside Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs, or a good game of base-ball At he-festivals, with blackguard jibes, ironical license, bull-dances, drinking, laughter At the cider-mill, tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the juice through a straw At apple-peelings, wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings: Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles, screams, weeps Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard！where the dry-stalks are scattered！where the brood-cow waits in the hovel Where the bull advances to do his masculine work！where the stud to the mare！where the cock is treading the hen Where the heifers browse！where geese nip their food with short jerks Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles far and near Where the humming-bird shimmers！where the neck of the long-lived swan is curving and winding Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her near-human laugh Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden, half hid by the high weeds Where band-neck¨d partridges roost in a ring on the ground with their heads out Where burial coaches enter the arch¨d gates of a cemetery Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees Where the yellow-crown¨d heron comes to the edge of the marsh at night and feeds upon small crabs Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over the well Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs Through the gymnasium！through the curtain¨d saloon！through the office or public hall Pleas¨d with the native, and pleas¨d with the foreign！pleas¨d with the new and old Pleas¨d with women, the homely as well as the handsome Pleas¨d with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously Pleas¨d with the tune of the choir of the white-wash¨d church Pleas¨d with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher, or any preacher！impress¨d seriously at the camp-meeting: Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon！flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate-glass Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn¨d up to the clouds, My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle: Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek¨d bush-boy！(behind me he rides at the drape of the day) Far from the settlements, studying the print of animals¨ feet, or the moccasin print By the cot in the hospital, reaching lemonade to a feverish patient Nigh the coffin¨d corpse when all is still, examining with a candle: Voyaging to every port, to dicker and adventure Hurrying with the modern crowd, as eager and fickle as any Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while Walking the old hills of Judea, with the beautiful gentle God by my side Speeding through space！speeding through heaven and the stars Speeding amid the seven satellites, and the broad ring, and the diameter of eighty thousand miles Speeding with tail¨d meteors！throwing fire-balls like the rest Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning, Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing I tread day and night such roads. I visit the orchards of spheres, and look at the product: And look at quintillions ripen¨d, and look at quintillions green. I fly the flight of the fluid and swallowing soul My course runs below the soundings of plummets. I help myself to material and immaterial No guard can shut me off, nor law prevent me. I anchor my ship for a little while only My messengers continually cruise away, or bring their returns to me. I go hunting polar furs and the seal！leaping chasms with a pike-pointed staff！clinging to topples of brittle and blue. I ascend to the foretruck I take my place late at night in the crow¨s-nest We sail the arctic sea！it is plenty light enough Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty The enormous masses of ice pass me, and I pass them！the scenery is plain in all directions The white-topt mountains show in the distance！I fling out my fancies toward them (We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to be engaged We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment！we pass with still feet and caution Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin¨d city The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities of the globe.) I am a free companion！I bivouac by invading watchfires. I turn the bridegroom out of bed, and stay with the bride myself I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips. My voice is the wife¨s voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs They fetch my man¨s body up, dripping and drown¨d. I understand the large hearts of heroes, The courage of present times and all times How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the steam-ship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm How he knuckled tight, and gave not back one inch, and was faithful of days and faithful of nights, And chalk¨d in large letters, on a board, Be of good cheer, we will not desert you: How he follow¨d with them, and tack¨d with them！and would not give it up How he saved the drifting company at last: How the lank loose-gown¨d women look¨d when boated from the side of their prepared graves How the silent old-faced infants, and the lifted sick, and the sharp-lipp¨d unshaved men: All this I swallow！it tastes good！I like it well！it becomes mine I am the man！I suffer¨d！I was there. The disdain and calmness of olden martyrs The mother, condemn¨d for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her children gazing on The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence, blowing, cover¨d with sweat The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck！the murderous buckshot and the bullets All these I feel, or am. I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs, Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn¨d with the ooze of my skin I fall on the weeds and stones The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close, Taunt my dizzy ears, and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks. Agonies are one of my changes of garments I do not ask the wounded person how he feels！I myself become the wounded person My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe. I am the mash¨d fireman with breast-bone broken Tumbling walls buried me in their debris Heat and smoke I inspired！I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels They have clear¨d the beams away！they tenderly lift me forth. I lie in the night air in my red shirt！the pervading hush is for my sake Painless after all I lie, exhausted but not so unhappy White and beautiful are the faces around me！the heads are bared of their fire-caps The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches. Distant and dead resuscitate They show as the dial or move as the hands of me！I am the clock myself. I am an old artillerist！I tell of my fort¨s bombardment I am there again. Again the long roll of the drummers Again the attacking cannon, mortars Again, to my listening ears, the cannon responsive. I take part！I see and hear the whole The cries, curses, roar！the plaudits for well-aim¨d shots The ambulanza slowly passing, trailing its red drip Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs The fall of grenades through the rent roof！the fan-shaped explosion The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air. Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general！he furiously waves with his hand He gasps through the clot, Mind not me！mind！the entrenchments. Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth (I tell not the fall of Alamo, Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo, The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo) ¨Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve young men. Retreating, they had form¨d in a hollow square, with their baggage for breastworks Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemy¨s, nine times their number, was the price they took in advance Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv¨d writing and seal, gave up their arms, and march¨d back prisoners of war. They were the glory of the race of rangers Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship, Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate, Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters, Not a single one over thirty years of age. The second First-day morning they were brought out in squads, and massacred！it was beautiful early summer The work commenced about five o¨clock, and was over by eight. None obey¨d the command to kneel Some made a mad and helpless rush！some stood stark and straight A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart！the living and dead lay together The maim¨d and mangled dug in the dirt！the newcomers saw them there Some, half-kill¨d, attempted to crawl away These were despatch¨d with bayonets, or batter¨d with the blunts of muskets A youth not seventeen years old seiz¨d his assassin till two more came to release him The three were all torn, and cover¨d with the boy¨s blood. At eleven o¨clock began the burning of the bodies: That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men. Would you hear of an old-fashion¨d sea-fight? Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars? List to the story as my grandmother¨s father, the sailor, told it to me. Our foe was no skulk in his ship, I tell you, (said he) His was the surly English pluck！and there is no tougher or truer, and never was, and never will be Along the lower¨d eve he came, horribly raking us. We closed with him！the yards entangled！the cannon touch¨d My captain lash¨d fast with his own hands. We had receiv¨d some eighteen pound shots under the water On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire, killing all around, and blowing up overhead. Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark Ten o¨clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain, and five feet of water reported The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the afterhold, to give them a chance for themselves. The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels, They see so many strange faces, they do not know whom to trust. Our frigate takes fire The other asks if we demand quarter? If our colors are struck, and the fighting is done? Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain, We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part of the fighting. Only three guns are in use One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy¨s mainmast Two, well served with grape and canister, silence his musketry and clear his decks. The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially the main-top They hold out bravely during the whole of the action. Not a moment¨s cease The leaks gain fast on the pumps！the fire eats toward the powder-magazine. One of the pumps has been shot away！it is generally thought we are sinking. Serene stands the little captain He is not hurried！his voice is neither high nor low His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns. Toward twelve at night, there in the beams of the moon, they surrender to us. Stretch¨d and still lies the midnight Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking！preparations to pass to the one we have conquer¨d The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his orders through a countenance white as a sheet Near by, the corpse of the child that serv¨d in the cabin The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully curl¨d whiskers The flames, spite of all that can be done, flickering aloft and below The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty Formless stacks of bodies, and bodies by themselves！dabs of flesh upon the masts and spars, Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the soothe of waves, Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels, strong scent, Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and fields by the shore, death-messages given in charge to survivors, The hiss of the surgeon¨s knife, the gnawing teeth of his saw, Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild scream, and long, dull, tapering groan These so！these irretrievable. O Christ! This is mastering me! In at the conquer¨d doors they crowd. I am possess¨d. I embody all presences outlaw¨d or suffering See myself in prison shaped like another man, And feel the dull unintermitted pain. For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch It is I let out in the morning, and barr¨d at night. Not a mutineer walks handcuff¨d to jail, but I am handcuff¨d to him and walk by his side (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one, with sweat on my twitching lips.) Not a youngster is taken for larceny, but I go up too, and am tried and sentenced. Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp, but I also lie at the last gasp My face is ash-color¨d！my sinews gnarl！away from me people retreat. Askers embody themselves in me, and I am embodied in them I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg. Enough! enough! enough! Somehow I have been stunn¨d. Stand back! Give me a little time beyond my cuff¨d head, slumbers, dreams, gaping I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake. That I could forget the mockers and insults! That I could forget the trickling tears, and the blows of the bludgeons and hammers! That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and bloody crowning. I remember now I resume the overstaid fraction The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it, or to any graves Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me. I troop forth replenish¨d with supreme power, one of an average unending procession Inland and sea-coast we go, and we pass all boundary lines Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole earth The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thousands of years. Eleves, I salute you! come forward! Continue your annotations, continue your questionings. The friendly and flowing savage, Who is he? Is he waiting for civilization, or past it, and mastering it? Is he some south-westerner, rais¨d out-doors? Is he Kanadian? Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon, California? the mountains? prairie-life, bush-life? or from the sea? Wherever he goes, men and women accept and desire him They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to them, stay with them. Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb¨d head, laughter, and naivet└, Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes and emanations They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath！they fly out of the glance of his eyes. Flaunt of the sunshine, I need not your bask,！lie over! You light surfaces only！I force surfaces and depths also. Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands Say, old Top-knot! what do you want? Man or woman! I might tell how I like you, but cannot And might tell what it is in me, and what it is in you, but cannot And might tell that pining I have！that pulse of my nights and days. Behold! I do not give lectures, or a little charity When I give, I give myself. You there, impotent, loose in the knees! Open your scarf¨d chops till I blow grit within you Spread your palms, and lift the flaps of your pockets I am not to be denied！I compel！I have stores plenty and to spare And anything I have I bestow. I do not ask who you are！that is not so important to me You can do nothing, and be nothing, but what I will infold you. To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean On his right cheek I put the family kiss, And in my soul I swear, I never will deny him. On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes (This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.) To any one dying！thither I speed, and twist the knob of the door Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed Let the physician and the priest go home. I seize the descending man, and raise him with resistless will. O despairer, here is my neck By God! you shall not go down! Hang your whole weight upon me. I dilate you with tremendous breath！I buoy you up Every room of the house do I fill with an arm¨d force, Lovers of me, bafflers of graves. Sleep! I and they keep guard all night Not doubt！not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so. I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help. I heard what was said of the universe Heard it and heard it of several thousand years: It is middling well as far as it goes,！But is that all? Magnifying and applying come I, Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters, Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah, Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha, In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf, the crucifix engraved, With Odin, and the hideous-faced Mexitli, and every idol and image Taking them all for what they are worth, and not a cent more Admitting they were alive and did the work of their days (They bore mites, as for unfledg¨d birds, who have now to rise and fly and sing for themselves) Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself！ bestowing them freely on each man and woman I see Discovering as much, or more, in a framer framing a house Putting higher claims for him there with his roll¨d-up sleeves, driving the mallet and chisel Not objecting to special revelations！considering a curl of smoke, or a hair on the back of my hand, just as curious as any revelation Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes no less to me than the Gods of the antique wars Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction, Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr¨d laths！their white foreheads whole and unhurt out of the flames: By the mechanic¨s wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for every person born Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels with shirts bagg¨d out at their waists The snag-tooth¨d hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come, Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his brother, and sit by him while he is tried for forgery What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and not filling the square rod then The bull and the bug never worship¨d half enough Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream¨d The supernatural of no account！myself waiting my time to be one of the Supremes The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the best, and be as prodigious: By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator Putting myself here and now to the ambush¨d womb of the shadows. A call in the midst of the crowd My own voice, orotund, sweeping, and final. Come my children Come my boys and girls, my women, household, and intimates Now the performer launches his nerve！he has pass¨d his prelude on the reeds within. Easily written, loose-finger¨d chords! I feel the thrum of your climax and close. My head slues round on my neck Music rolls, but not from the organ Folks are around me, but they are no household of mine. Ever the hard, unsunk ground Ever the eaters and drinkers！ever the upward and downward sun！ever the air and the ceaseless tides Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real Ever the old inexplicable query！ever that thorn¨d thumb！that breath of itches and thirsts Ever the vexer¨s hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides, and bring him forth Ever love！ever the sobbing liquid of life Ever the bandage under the chin！ever the tressels of death. Here and there, with dimes on the eyes, walking To feed the greed of the belly, the brains liberally spooning Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never once going Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff for payment receiving A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming. This is the city, and I am one of the citizens Whatever interests the rest interests me！politics, wars, markets, newspapers, schools, Benevolent societies, improvements, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories, stocks, stores, real estate, and personal estate. The little plentiful mannikins, skipping around in collars and tail¨d coats, I am aware who they are！(they are positively not worms or fleas.) I acknowledge the duplicates of myself！the weakest and shallowest is deathless with me What I do and say, the same waits for them Every thought that flounders in me, the same flounders in them. I know perfectly well my own egotism I know my omnivorous lines, and will not write any less And would fetch you, whoever you are, flush with myself. No words of routine are mine, But abruptly to question, to leap beyond, yet nearer bring: This printed and bound book！but the printer, and the printing-office boy? The well-taken photographs！but your wife or friend close and solid in your arms? The black ship, mail¨d with iron, her mighty guns in her turrets！but the pluck of the captain and engineers? In the houses, the dishes and fare and furniture！but the host and hostess, and the look out of their eyes? The sky up there！yet here, or next door, or across the way? The saints and sages in history！but you yourself? Sermons, creeds, theology！but the fathomless human brain, And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life? I do not despise you, priests My faith is the greatest of faiths, and the least of faiths, Enclosing worship ancient and modern, and all between ancient and modern, Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years, Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the Gods, saluting the sun, Making a fetish of the first rock or stump, powwowing with sticks in the circle of obis, Helping the lama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols, Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession！rapt and austere in the woods, a gymnosophist, Drinking mead from the skull-cup！to Shastas and Vedas admirant！minding the Koran, Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife, beating the serpent-skin drum, Accepting the Gospels！accepting him that was crucified, knowing assuredly that he is divine, To the mass kneeling, or the puritan¨s prayer rising, or sitting patiently in a pew, Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting dead-like till my spirit arouses me, Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land, Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits. One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang, I turn and talk, like a man leaving charges before a journey. Down-hearted doubters, dull and excluded, Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, dishearten¨d, atheistical I know every one of you！I know the sea of torment, doubt, despair and unbelief. How the flukes splash! How they contort, rapid as lightning, with spasms, and spouts of blood! Be at peace, bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers I take my place among you as much as among any The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the same, And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me, all, precisely the same. I do not know what is untried and afterward But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and cannot fail. Each who passes is consider¨d！each who stops is consider¨d！not a single one can it fail. It cannot fail the young man who died and was buried, Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side, Nor the little child that peep¨d in at the door, and then drew back, and was never seen again, Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with bitterness worse than gall, Nor him in the poor house, tubercled by rum and the bad disorder, Nor the numberless slaughter¨d and wreck¨d！nor the brutish koboo call¨d the ordure of humanity, Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in, Nor anything in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth, Nor anything in the myriads of spheres！nor one of the myriads of myriads that inhabit them, Nor the present！nor the least wisp that is known. It is time to explain myself！Let us stand up. What is known I strip away I launch all men and women forward with me into THE UNKNOWN. The clock indicates the moment！but what does eternity indicate? We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them. Births have brought us richness and variety, And other births will bring us richness and variety. I do not call one greater and one smaller That which fills its period and place is equal to any. Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister? I am sorry for you！they are not murderous or jealous upon me All has been gentle with me！I keep no account with lamentation (What have I to do with lamentation?) I am an acme of things accomplish¨d, and I an encloser of things to be. My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps All below duly travel¨d, and still I mount and mount. Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me Afar down I see the huge first Nothing！I know I was even there I waited unseen and always, and slept through the lethargic mist, And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid carbon. Long I was hugg¨d close！long and long. Immense have been the preparations for me, Faithful and friendly the arms that have help¨d me. Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings They sent influences to look after what was to hold me. Before I was born out of my mother, generations guided me My embryo has never been torpid！nothing could overlay it. For it the nebula cohered to an orb, The long slow strata piled to rest it on, Vast vegetables gave it sustenance, Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths, and deposited it with care. All forces have been steadily employ¨d to complete and delight me Now on this spot I stand with my robust Soul. O span of youth! Ever-push¨d elasticity! O manhood, balanced, florid, and full. My lovers suffocate me! Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin, Jostling me through streets and public halls！coming naked to me at night, Crying by day Ahoy! from the rocks of the river！swinging and chirping over my head, Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush, Lighting on every moment of my life, Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses, Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts, and giving them to be mine. Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days! Every condition promulges not only itself！it promulges what grows after and out of itself, And the dark hush promulges as much as any. I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems, And all I see, multiplied as high as I can cipher, edge but the rim of the farther systems. Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding, Outward and outward, and forever outward. My sun has his sun, and round him obediently wheels, He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit, And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them. There is no stoppage, and never can be stoppage If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces, were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would not avail in the long run We should surely bring up again where we now stand, And as surely go as much farther！and then farther and farther. A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do not hazard the span, or make it impatient They are but parts！anything is but a part. See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that. My rendezvous is appointed！it is certain The Lord will be there, and wait till I come, on perfect terms (The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine, will be there.) I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured, and never will be measured. I tramp a perpetual journey！(come listen all!) My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair I have no chair, no church, no philosophy I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, or exchange But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll, My left hand hooking you round the waist, My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents, and a plain public road. Not I！not any one else, can travel that road for you, You must travel it for yourself. It is not far！it is within reach Perhaps you have been on it since you were born, and did not know Perhaps it is every where on water and on land. Shoulder your duds, dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth, Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go. If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand on my hip, And in due time you shall repay the same service to me For after we start, we never lie by again. This day before dawn I ascended a hill, and look¨d at the crowded heaven, And I said to my Spirit, When we become the enfolders of those orbs, and the pleasure and knowledge of everything in them, shall we be fill¨d and satisfied then? And my Spirit said, No, we but level that life, to pass and continue beyond. You are also asking me questions, and I hear you I answer that I cannot answer！you must find out for yourself. Sit a while, dear son Here are biscuits to eat, and here is milk to drink But as soon as you sleep, and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you with a good-bye kiss, and open the gate for your egress hence. Long enough have you dream¨d contemptible dreams Now I wash the gum from your eyes You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light, and of every moment of your life. Long have you timidly waded, holding a plank by the shore Now I will you to be a bold swimmer, To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout, and laughingly dash with your hair. I am the teacher of athletes He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own, proves the width of my own He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher. The boy I love, the same becomes a man, not through derived power, but in his own right, Wicked, rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear, Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak, Unrequited love, or a slight, cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts, First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull¨s eye, to sail a skiff, to sing a song, or play on the banjo, Preferring scars, and the beard, and faces pitted with small-pox, over all latherers, And those well tann¨d to those that keep out of the sun. I teach straying from me！yet who can stray from me? I follow you, whoever you are, from the present hour My words itch at your ears till you understand them. I do not say these things for a dollar, or to fill up the time while I wait for a boat It is you talking just as much as myself！I act as the tongue of you Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen¨d. I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house, And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her who privately stays with me in the open air. If you would understand me, go to the heights or water-shore The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves a key The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words. No shutter¨d room or school can commune with me, But roughs and little children better than they. The young mechanic is closest to me！he knows me well The woodman, that takes his axe and jug with him, shall take me with him all day The farm-boy, ploughing in the field, feels good at the sound of my voice In vessels that sail, my words sail！I go with fishermen and seamen, and love them. The soldier camp¨d, or upon the march, is mine On the night ere the pending battle, many seek me, and I do not fail them On the solemn night (it may be their last,) those that know me, seek me. My face rubs to the hunter¨s face, when he lies down alone in his blanket The driver, thinking of me, does not mind the jolt of his wagon The young mother and old mother comprehend me The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment, and forget where they are They and all would resume what I have told them. I have said that the soul is not more than the body, And I have said that the body is not more than the soul And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one¨s self is, And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy, walks to his own funeral, drest in his shroud, And I or you, pocketless of a dime, may purchase the pick of the earth, And to glance with an eye, or show a bean in its pod, confounds the learning of all times, And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it may become a hero, And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel¨d universe, And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand cool and composed before a million universes. And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God, For I, who am curious about each, am not curious about God (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God, and about death.) I hear and behold God in every object, yet understand God not in the least, Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself. Why should I wish to see God better than this day? I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass I find letters from God dropt in the street！and every one is sign¨d by God¨s name, And I leave them where they are, for I know that wheresoe¨er I go, Others will punctually come forever and ever. And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to try to alarm me. To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes I see the elder-hand, pressing, receiving, supporting I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors, And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape. And as to you, Corpse, I think you are good manure！but that does not offend me I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing, I reach to the leafy lips！I reach to the polish¨d breasts of melons. And as to you Life, I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.) I hear you whispering there, O stars of heaven O suns! O grass of graves! O perpetual transfers and promotions! If you do not say anything, how can I say anything? Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest, Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight, Toss, sparkles of day and dusk! toss on the black stems that decay in the muck! Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs. I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small. There is that in me！I do not know what it is！but I know it is in me. Wrench¨d and sweaty！calm and cool then my body becomes I sleep！I sleep long. I do not know it！it is without name！it is a word unsaid It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol. Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me. Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters. Do you see, O my brothers and sisters? It is not chaos or death！it is form, union, plan！it is eternal life！it is HAPPINESS. The past and present wilt！I have fill¨d them, emptied them, And proceed to fill my next fold of the future. Listener up there! Here, you! What have you to confide to me? Look in my face, while I snuff the sidle of evening Talk honestly！no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer. Do I contradict myself? Very well, then, I contradict myself (I am large！I contain multitudes.) I concentrate toward them that are nigh！I wait on the door-slab. Who has done his day¨s work? Who will soonest be through with his supper? Who wishes to walk with me? Will you speak before I am gone? Will you prove already too late? The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me！he complains of my gab and my loitering. I too am not a bit tamed！I too am untranslatable I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world. The last scud of day holds back for me It flings my likeness after the rest, and true as any, on the shadow¨d wilds It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk. I depart as air！I shake my white locks at the runaway sun I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags. I bequeathe myself to the dirt, to grow from the grass I love If you want me again, look for me under your boot-soles. You will hardly know who I am, or what I mean But I shall be good health to you nevertheless, And filter and fibre your blood. Failing to fetch me at first, keep encouraged Missing me one place, search another I stop somewhere, waiting for you. SPLENDOR of ended day, floating and filling me! Hour prophetic！hour resuming the past! Inflating my throat！you, divine average! You, Earth and Life, till the last ray gleams, I sing. Open mouth of my Soul, uttering gladness, Eyes of my Soul, seeing perfection, Natural life of me, faithfully praising things Corroborating forever the triumph of things. Illustrious every one! Illustrious what we name space！sphere of unnumber¨d spirits Illustrious the mystery of motion, in all beings, even the tiniest insect Illustrious the attribute of speech！the senses！the body Illustrious the passing light! Illustrious the pale reflection on the new moon in the western sky! Illustrious whatever I see, or hear, or touch, to the last. Good in all, In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals, In the annual return of the seasons, In the hilarity of youth, In the strength and flush of manhood, In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age, In the superb vistas of Death. Wonderful to depart Wonderful to be here! The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood! To breathe the air, how delicious! To speak! to walk! to seize something by the hand! To prepare for sleep, for bed！to look on my rose-color¨d flesh To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large To be this incredible God I am To have gone forth among other Gods！these men and women I love. Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself! How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around! How the clouds pass silently overhead! How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on! How the water sports and sings! (Surely it is alive!) How the trees rise and stand up！with strong trunks！with branches and leaves! (Surely there is something more in each of the tree！some living Soul.) O amazement of things! even the least particle! O spirituality of things! O strain musical, flowing through ages and continents！now reaching me and America! I take your strong chords！I intersperse them, and cheerfully pass them forward. I too carol the sun, usher¨d, or at noon, or, as now, setting, I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth, and of all the growths of the earth, I too have felt the resistless call of myself. As I sail¨d down the Mississippi, As I wander¨d over the prairies, As I have lived！As I have look¨d through my windows, my eyes, As I went forth in the morning！As I beheld the light breaking in the east As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and again on the beach of the Western Sea As I roam¨d the streets of inland Chicago！whatever streets I have roam¨d Or cities, or silent woods, or peace, or even amid the sights of war Wherever I have been, I have charged myself with contentment and triumph. I sing the Equalities, modern or old, I sing the endless finales of things I say Nature continues！Glory continues I praise with electric voice For I do not see one imperfection in the universe And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last in the universe. O setting sun! though the time has come, I still warble under you, if none else does, unmitigated adoration. ASHES of soldiers! As I muse, retrospective, murmuring a chant in thought, Lo! the war resumes！again to my sense your shapes, And again the advance of armies. Noiseless as mists and vapors, From their graves in the trenches ascending, From the cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee, From every point of the compass, out of the countless unnamed graves, In wafted clouds, in myraids large, or squads of twos or threes, or single ones, they come, And silently gather round me. Now sound no note, O trumpeters! Not at the head of my cavalry, parading on spirited horses, With sabres drawn and glist¨ning, and carbines by their thighs！(ah, my brave horsemen! My handsome, tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride, With all the perils, were yours!) Nor you drummers！neither at reveille, at dawn, Nor the long roll alarming the camp！nor even the muffled beat for a burial Nothing from you, this time, O drummers, bearing my warlike drums. But aside from these, and the marts of wealth, and the crowded promenade, Admitting around me comrades close, unseen by the rest, and voiceless, The slain elate and alive again！the dust and debris alive, I chant this chant of my silent soul, in the name of all dead soldiers. Faces so pale, with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet Draw close, but speak not. Phantoms of countless lost! Invisible to the rest, henceforth become my companions! Follow me ever! desert me not, while I live. Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living! sweet are the musical voices sounding! But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead, with their silent eyes. Dearest comrades! all is over and long gone But love is not over！and what love, O comrades! Perfume from battle-fields rising！up from foetor arising. Perfume therefore my chant, O love! immortal Love! Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers, Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride! Perfume all! make all wholesome! Make these ashes to nourish and blossom, O love! O chant! solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry. Give me exhaustless！make me a fountain, That I exhale love from me wherever I go, like a moist perennial dew, For the ashes of all dead soldiers. OF Public Opinion Of a calm and cool fiat, sooner or later, (How impassive! How certain and final!) Of the President with pale face, asking secretly to himself, What will the people say at last? Of the frivolous Judge！Of the corrupt Congressman, Governor, Mayor！Of such as these, standing helpless and exposed Of the mumbling and screaming priest！(soon, soon deserted) Of the lessening, year by year, of venerableness, and of the dicta of officers, statutes, pulpits, schools Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader, of the intuitions of men and women, and of self-esteem, and of personality ！Of the New World！Of the Democracies, resplendent, en-masse Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them and to me, Of the shining sun by them！Of the inherent light, greater than the rest, Of the envelopment of all by them, and of the effusion of all from them. I HEAR America singing, the varied carols I hear Those of mechanics！each one singing his, as it should be, blithe and strong The carpenter singing his, as he measures his plank or beam, The mason singing his, as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat！the deckhand singing on the steamboat deck The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench！the hatter singing as he stands The wood-cutter¨s song！the ploughboy¨s, on his way in the morning, or at the noon intermission, or at sundown The delicious singing of the mother！or of the young wife at work！or of the girl sewing or washing！Each singing what belongs to her, and to none else The day what belongs to the day！At night, the party of young fellows, robust, friendly, Singing, with open mouths, their strong melodious songs. TEARS! tears! tears! In the night, in solitude, tears On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck¨d in by the sand Tears！not a star shining！all dark and desolate Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head: ！O who is that ghost?！that form in the dark, with tears? What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch¨d there on the sand? Streaming tears！sobbing tears！throes, choked with wild cries O storm, embodied, rising, careering, with swift steps along the beach O wild and dismal night storm, with wind! O belching and desperate! O shade, so sedate and decorous by day, with calm countenance and regulated pace But away, at night, as you fly, none looking！O then the unloosen¨d ocean, Of tears! tears! tears! I HEARD that you ask¨d for something to prove this puzzle, the New World, And to define America, her athletic Democracy Therefore I send you my poems, that you behold in them what you wanted. WHEN lilacs last in the door-yard bloom¨d, And the great star early droop¨d in the western sky in the night, I mourn¨d！and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring. O ever-returning spring! trinity sure to me you bring Lilac blooming perennial, and drooping star in the west, And thought of him I love. O powerful, western, fallen star! O shades of night! O moody, tearful night! O great star disappear¨d! O the black murk that hides the star! O cruel hands that hold me powerless! O helpless soul of me! O harsh surrounding cloud, that will not free my soul! In the door-yard fronting an old farm-house, near the white-wash¨d palings, Stands the lilac bush, tall-growing, with heart-shaped leaves of rich green, With many a pointed blossom, rising, delicate, with the perfume strong I love, With every leaf a miracle......and from this bush in the door-yard, With delicate-color¨d blossoms, and heart-shaped leaves of rich green, A sprig, with its flower, I break. In the swamp, in secluded recesses, A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song. Solitary, the thrush, The hermit, withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements, Sings by himself a song. Song of the bleeding throat! Death¨s outlet song of life！(for well, dear brother, I know If thou wast not gifted to sing, thou would¨st surely die.) Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities, Amid lanes, and through old woods, (where lately the violets peep¨d from the ground, spotting the gray debris) Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes！passing the endless grass Passing the yellow-spear¨d wheat, every grain from its shroud in the dark-brown fields uprising Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave, Night and day journeys a coffin. Coffin that passes through lanes and streets, Through day and night, with the great cloud darkening the land, With the pomp of the inloop¨d flags, with the cities draped in black, With the show of the States themselves, as of crape-veil¨d women, standing, With processions long and winding, and the flambeaus of the night, With the countless torches lit！with the silent sea of faces, and the unbared heads, With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces, With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong and solemn With all the mournful voices of the dirges, pour¨d around the coffin, The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs！Where amid these you journey, With the tolling, tolling bells¨ perpetual clang Here! coffin that slowly passes, I give you my sprig of lilac. (Nor for you, for one, alone Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring: For fresh as the morning！thus would I carol a song for you, O sane and sacred death. All over bouquets of roses, O death! I cover you over with roses and early lilies But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first, Copious, I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes With loaded arms I come, pouring for you, For you, and the coffins all of you, O death.) O western orb, sailing the heaven! Now I know what you must have meant, as a month since we walk¨d, As we walk¨d up and down in the dark blue so mystic, As we walk¨d in silence the transparent shadowy night, As I saw you had something to tell, as you bent to me night after night, As you droop¨d from the sky low down, as if to my side, (while the other stars all look¨d on) As we wander¨d together the solemn night, (for something, I know not what, kept me from sleep) As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west, ere you went, how full you were of woe As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze, in the cold transparent night, As I watch¨d where you pass¨d and was lost in the netherward black of the night, As my soul, in its trouble, dissatisfied, sank, as where you, sad orb, Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone. Sing on, there in the swamp! O singer bashful and tender! I hear your notes！I hear your call I hear！I come presently！I understand you But a moment I linger！for the lustrous star has detain¨d me The star, my departing comrade, holds and detains me. O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved? And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone? And what shall my perfume be, for the grave of him I love? Sea-winds, blown from east and west, Blown from the eastern sea, and blown from the western sea, till there on the prairies meeting: These, and with these, and the breath of my chant, I perfume the grave of him I love. O what shall I hang on the chamber walls? And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls, To adorn the burial-house of him I love? Pictures of growing spring, and farms, and homes, With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright, With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking sun, burning, expanding the air With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves of the trees prolific In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a wind-dapple here and there With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky, and shadows And the city at hand, with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys, And all the scenes of life, and the workshops, and the workmen homeward returning. Lo! body and soul! this land! Mighty Manhattan, with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides, and the ships The varied and ample land！the South and the North in the light！Ohio¨s shores, and flashing Missouri, And ever the far-spreading prairies, cover¨d with grass and corn. Lo! the most excellent sun, so calm and haughty The violet and purple morn, with just-felt breezes The gentle, soft-born, measureless light The miracle, spreading, bathing all！the fulfill¨d noon The coming eve, delicious！the welcome night, and the stars, Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land. Sing on! sing on, you gray-brown bird! Sing from the swamps, the recesses！pour your chant from the bushes Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines. Sing on, dearest brother！warble your reedy song Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe. O liquid, and free, and tender! O wild and loose to my soul! O wondrous singer! You only I hear......yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart) Yet the lilac, with mastering odor, holds me. Now while I sat in the day, and look¨d forth, In the close of the day, with its light, and the fields of spring, and the farmer preparing his crops, In the large unconscious scenery of my land, with its lakes and forests, In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb¨d winds, and the storms) Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the voices of children and women, The many-moving sea-tides,！and I saw the ships how they sail¨d, And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy with labor, And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with its meals and minutia of daily usages And the streets, how their throbbings throbb¨d, and the cities pent！lo! then and there, Falling upon them all, and among them all, enveloping me with the rest, Appear¨d the cloud, appear¨d the long black trail And I knew Death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death. Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me, And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me, And I in the middle, as with companions, and as holding the hands of companions, I fled forth to the hiding receiving night, that talks not, Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness, To the solemn shadowy cedars, and ghostly pines so still. And the singer so shy to the rest receiv¨d me The gray-brown bird I know, receiv¨d us comrades three And he sang what seem¨d the carol of death, and a verse for him I love. From deep secluded recesses, From the fragrant cedars, and the ghostly pines so still, Came the carol of the bird. And the charm of the carol rapt me, As I held, as if by their hands, my comrades in the night And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird. DEATH CAROL. Come, lovely and soothing Death, Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving, In the day, in the night, to all, to each, Sooner or later, delicate Death. Prais¨d be the fathomless universe, For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious And for love, sweet love！But praise! praise! praise! For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding Death. Dark Mother, always gliding near, with soft feet, Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome? Then I chant it for thee！I glorify thee above all I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly. Approach, strong Deliveress! When it is so！when thou hast taken them, I joyously sing the dead, Lost in the loving, floating ocean of thee, Laved in the flood of thy bliss, O Death. From me to thee glad serenades, Dances for thee I propose, saluting thee！adornments and feastings for thee And the sights of the open landscape, and the high-spread sky, are fitting, And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night. The night, in silence, under many a star The ocean shore, and the husky whispering wave, whose voice I know And the soul turning to thee, O vast and well-veil¨d Death, And the body gratefully nestling close to thee. Over the tree-tops I float thee a song! Over the rising and sinking waves！over the myriad fields, and the prairies wide Over the dense-pack¨d cities all, and the teeming wharves and ways, I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee, O Death! To the tally of my soul, Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird, With pure, deliberate notes, spreading, filling the night. Loud in the pines and cedars dim, Clear in the freshness moist, and the swamp-perfume And I with my comrades there in the night. While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed, As to long panoramas of visions. I saw askant the armies And I saw, as in noiseless dreams, hundreds of battle-flags Borne through the smoke of the battles, and pierc¨d with missiles, I saw them, And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,) And the staffs all splinter¨d and broken. I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them, And the white skeletons of young men！I saw them I saw the debris and debris of all the dead soldiers of the war But I saw they were not as was thought They themselves were fully at rest！they suffer¨d not The living remain¨d and suffer¨d！the mother suffer¨d, And the wife and the child, and the musing comrade suffer¨d, And the armies that remain¨d suffer¨d. Passing the visions, passing the night Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades¨ hands Passing the song of the hermit bird, and the tallying song of my soul, (Victorious song, death¨s outlet song, yet varying, ever-altering song, As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling, flooding the night, Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again bursting with joy, Covering the earth, and filling the spread of the heaven, As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,) Passing, I leave thee, lilac with heart-shaped leaves I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring, I cease from my song for thee From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee, O comrade lustrous, with silver face in the night. Yet each I keep, and all, retrievements out of the night The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird, And the tallying chant, the echo arous¨d in my soul, With the lustrous and drooping star, with the countenance full of woe, With the lilac tall, and its blossoms of mastering odor With the holders holding my hand, nearing the call of the bird, Comrades mine, and I in the midst, and their memory ever I keep！for the dead I loved so well For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands...and this for his dear sake Lilac and star and bird, twined with the chant of my soul, There in the fragrant pines, and the cedars dusk and dim. ADIEU, O soldier! You of the rude campaigning, (which we shared,) The rapid march, the life of the camp, The hot contention of opposing fronts！the long manoeuver, Red battles with their slaughter,！the stimulus！the strong, terrific game, Spell of all brave and manly hearts！the trains of Time through you, and like of you, all fill¨d, With war, and war¨s expression. Adieu, dear comrade! Your mission is fulfill¨d！but I, more warlike, Myself, and this contentious soul of mine, Still on our own campaigning bound, Through untried roads, with ambushes, opponents lined, Through many a sharp defeat and many a crisis！often baffled, Here marching, ever marching on, a war fight out！aye here, To fiercer, weightier battles give expression. A NOISELESS, patient spider, I mark¨d, where, on a little promontory, it stood, isolated Mark¨d how, to explore the vacant, vast surrounding, It launch¨d forth filament, filament, filament, out of itself Ever unreeling them！ever tirelessly speeding them. And you, O my Soul, where you stand, Surrounded, surrounded, in measureless oceans of space, Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing,！seeking the spheres, to connect them Till the bridge you will need, be form¨d！till the ductile anchor hold Till the gossamer thread you fling, catch somewhere, O my Soul. WHY! who makes much of a miracle? As to me, I know of nothing else but miracles, Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan, Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky, Or wade with naked feet along the beach, just in the edge of the water, Or stand under trees in the woods, Or talk by day with any one I love！or sleep in the bed at night with any one I love, Or sit at table at dinner with my mother, Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car, Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive, of a summer forenoon, Or animals feeding in the fields, Or birds！or the wonderfulness of insects in the air, Or the wonderfulness of the sun-down！or of stars shining so quiet and bright, Or the exquisite, delicate, thin curve of the new moon in spring Or whether I go among those I like best, and that like me best！mechanics, boatmen, farmers, Or among the savans！or to the soiree！or to the opera, Or stand a long while looking at the movements of machinery, Or behold children at their sports, Or the admirable sight of the perfect old man, or the perfect old woman, Or the sick in hospitals, or the dead carried to burial, Or my own eyes and figure in the glass These, with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles, The whole referring！yet each distinct, and in its place. To me, every hour of the light and dark is a miracle, Every cubic inch of space is a miracle, Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread with the same, Every foot of the interior swarms with the same Every spear of grass！the frames, limbs, organs, of men and women, and all that concerns them, All these to me are unspeakably perfect miracles. To me the sea is a continual miracle The fishes that swim！the rocks！the motion of the waves！the ships, with men in them, What stranger miracles are there? IN midnight sleep, of many a face of anguish, Of the look at first of the mortally wounded！of that indescribable look Of the dead on their backs, with arms extended wide, I dream, I dream, I dream. Of scenes of nature, fields and mountains Of skies, so beauteous after a storm！and at night the moon so unearthly bright, Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and gather the heaps, I dream, I dream, I dream. Long, long have they pass¨d！faces and trenches and fields Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure！or away from the fallen, Onward I sped at the time！But now of their forms at night, I dream, I dream, I dream. WHEN I heard the learn¨d astronomer When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me When I was shown the charts and the diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them When I, sitting, heard the astronomer, where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room, How soon, unaccountable, I became tired and sick Till rising and gliding out, I wander¨d off by myself, In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time, Look¨d up in perfect silence at the stars. O ME, man of slack faith so long! Standing aloof！denying portions so long Only aware to-day of compact, all-diffused truth Discovering to-day there is no lie, or form of lie, and can be none, but grows as inevitably upon itself as the truth does upon itself, Or as any law of the earth, or any natural production of the earth does. (This is curious, and may not be realized immediately！But it must be realized I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally with the rest, And that the universe does.) Where has fail¨d a perfect return, indifferent of lies or the truth? Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the spirit of man? or in the meat and blood? Meditating among liars, and retreating sternly into myself, I see that there are really no liars or lies after all, And that nothing fails its perfect return！And that what are called lies are perfect returns, And that each thing exactly represents itself, and what has preceded it, And that the truth includes all, and is compact, just as much as space is compact, And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of the truth！but that all is truth without exception And henceforth I will go celebrate anything I see or am, And sing and laugh, and deny nothing. TO conclude！I announce what comes after me I announce mightier offspring, orators, days, and then, for the present, depart. I remember I said, before my leaves sprang at all, I would raise my voice jocund and strong, with reference to consummations. When America does what was promis¨d, When there are plentiful athletic bards, inland and seaboard, When through These States walk a hundred millions of superb persons, When the rest part away for superb persons, and contribute to them, When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America, Then to me and mine our due fruition. I have press¨d through in my own right, I have sung the Body and the Soul！War and Peace have I sung, And the songs of Life and of Birth！and shown that there are many births: I have offer¨d my style to everyone！I have journey¨d with confident step While my pleasure is yet at the full, I whisper, So long! And take the young woman¨s hand, and the young man¨s hand, for the last time. I announce natural persons to arise I announce justice triumphant I announce uncompromising liberty and equality I announce the justification of candor, and the justification of pride. I announce that the identity of These States is a single identity only I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics of the earth insignificant. I announce adhesiveness！I say it shall be limitless, unloosen¨d I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for. I announce a man or woman coming！perhaps you are the one, (So long!) I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste, affectionate, compassionate, fully armed. I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded I announce a race of splendid and savage old men. O thicker and faster! (So long!) O crowding too close upon me I foresee too much！it means more than I thought It appears to me I am dying. Hasten throat, and sound your last! Salute me！salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more. Screaming electric, the atmosphere using, At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing, Swiftly on, but a little while alighting, Curious envelop¨d messages delivering, Sparkles hot, seed ethereal, down in the dirt dropping, Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring, To ages, and ages yet, the growth of the seed leaving, To troops out of me, out of the army, the war arising！they the tasks I have set promulging, To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing！their affection me more clearly explaining, To young men my problems offering！no dallier I！I the muscle of their brains trying, So I pass！a little time vocal, visible, contrary Afterward, a melodious echo, passionately bent for！(death making me really undying) The best of me then when no longer visible！for toward that I have been incessantly preparing. What is there more, that I lag and pause, and crouch extended with unshut mouth? Is there a single final farewell? My songs cease！I abandon them From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally, solely to you. Camerado! This is no book Who touches this, touches a man (Is it night? Are we here alone?) It is I you hold, and who holds you I spring from the pages into your arms！decease calls me forth. O how your fingers drowse me! Your breath falls around me like dew！your pulse lulls the tympans of my ears I feel immerged from head to foot Delicious！enough. Enough, O deed impromptu and secret! Enough, O gliding present! Enough, O summ¨d-up past! Dear friend, whoever you are, take this kiss, I give it especially to you！Do not forget me I feel like one who has done work for the day, to retire awhile I receive now again of my many translations！from my avataras ascending！while others doubtless await me An unknown sphere, more real than I dream¨d, more direct, darts awakening rays about me！So long! Remember my words！I may again return, I love you！I depart from materials I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead. I SIT and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all oppression and shame I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men, at anguish with themselves, remorseful after deeds done I see, in low life, the mother misused by her children, dying, neglected, gaunt, desperate I see the wife misused by her husband！I see the treacherous seducer of young women I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love, attempted to be hid！I see these sights on the earth I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny！I see martyrs and prisoners I observe a famine at sea！I observe the sailors casting lots who shall be kill¨d, to preserve the lives of the rest I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like All these！All the meanness and agony without end, I sitting, look out upon, See, hear, and am silent. LONG I thought that knowledge alone would suffice me！O if I could but obtain knowledge! Then my lands engrossed me！Lands of the prairies, Ohio¨s land, the southern savannas, engrossed me！For them I would live！I would be their orator Then I met the examples of old and new heroes！I heard of warriors, sailors, and all dauntless persons！And it seemed to me that I too had it in me to be as dauntless as any！and would be so And then, to enclose all, it came to me to strike up the songs of the New World！And then I believed my life must be spent in singing But now take notice, land of the prairies, land of the south savannas, Ohio¨s land, Take notice, you Kanuck woods！and you Lake Huron！and all that with you roll toward Niagara！and you Niagara also, And you, Californian mountains！That you each and all find somebody else to be your singer of songs, For I can be your singer of songs no longer！One who loves me is jealous of me, and withdraws me from all but love, With the rest I dispense！I sever from what I thought would suffice me, for it does not！it is now empty and tasteless to me, I heed knowledge, and the grandeur of The States, and the example of heroes, no more, I am indifferent to my own songs！I will go with him I love, It is to be enough for us that we are together！We never separate again. LAWS for Creations, For strong artists and leaders！for fresh broods of teachers, and perfect literats for America, For noble savans, and coming musicians. All must have reference to the ensemble of the world, and the compact truth of the world There shall be no subject too pronounced！All works shall illustrate the divine law of indirections. What do you suppose Creation is? What do you suppose will satisfy the Soul, except to walk free, and own no superior? What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but that man or woman is as good as God? And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself? And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean? And that you or any one must approach Creations through such laws? O TO make the most jubilant poem! Even to set off these, and merge with these, the carols of Death. O full of music! full of manhood, womanhood, infancy! Full of common employments! full of grain and trees. O for the voices of animals! O for the swiftness and balance of fishes! O for the dropping of rain-drops in a poem! O for the sunshine, and motion of waves in a poem. O the joy of my spirit! it is uncaged! it darts like lightning! It is not enough to have this globe, or a certain time！I will have thousands of globes, and all time. O the engineer¨s joys! To go with a locomotive! To hear the hiss of steam！the merry shriek！the steam-whistle！the laughing locomotive! To push with resistless way, and speed off in the distance. O the gleesome saunter over fields and hill-sides! The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds！the moist fresh stillness of the woods, The exquisite smell of the earth at day-break, and all through the forenoon. O the horseman¨s and horsewoman¨s joys! The saddle！the gallop！the pressure upon the seat！the cool gurgling by the ears and hair. O the fireman¨s joys! I hear the alarm at dead of night, I hear bells！shouts!！I pass the crowd！I run! The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure. O the joy of the strong-brawn¨d fighter, towering in the arena, in perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to meet his opponent. O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which only the human Soul is capable of generating and emitting in steady and limitless floods. O the mother¨s joys! The watching！the endurance！the precious love！the anguish！the patiently yielded life. O the joy of increase, growth, recuperation The joy of soothing and pacifying！the joy of concord and harmony. O to go back to the place where I was born! To hear the birds sing once more! To ramble about the house and barn, and over the fields, once more, And through the orchard and along the old lanes once more. O male and female! O the presence of women! (I swear there is nothing more exquisite to me than the mere presence of women) O for the girl, my mate! O for the happiness with my mate! O the young man as I pass! O I am sick after the friendship of him who, I fear, is indifferent to me. O the streets of cities! The flitting faces！the expressions, eyes, feet, costumes! O I cannot tell how welcome they are to me. O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks, or along the coast! O to continue and be employ¨d there all my life! O the briny and damp smell！the shore！the salt weeds exposed at low water, The work of fishermen！the work of the eel-fisher and clam-fisher. O it is I! I come with my clam-rake and spade! I come with my eel-spear Is the tide out? I join the group of clam-diggers on the flats, I laugh and work with them！I joke at my work, like a mettlesome young man. In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on foot on the ice！I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice Behold me, well-clothed, going gaily, or returning in the afternoon！my brood of tough boys accompaning me, My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love to be with no one else so well as they love to be with me, By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with me. Or, another time, in warm weather, out in a boat, to lift the lobster-pots, where they are sunk with heavy stones, (I know the buoys) O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon the water, as I row, just before sunrise, toward the buoys I pull the wicker pots up slantingly！the dark-green lobsters are desperate with their claws, as I take them out！I insert wooden pegs in the joints of their pincers, I go to all the places, one after another, and then row back to the shore, There, in a huge kettle of boiling water, the lobsters shall be boil¨d till their color becomes scarlet. Or, another time, mackerel-taking, Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they seem to fill the water for miles: Or, another time, fishing for rock-fish, in Chesapeake Bay！I one of the brown-faced crew: Or, another time, trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok, I stand with braced body, My left foot is on the gunwale！my right arm throws the coils of slender rope, In sight around me the quick veering and darting of fifty skiffs, my companions. O boating on the rivers! The voyage down the Niagara, (the St. Lawrence,)！the superb scenery！the steamers, The ships sailing！the Thousand Islands！the occasional timber-raft, and the raftsmen with long-reaching sweep-oars, The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke when they cook their supper at evening. O something pernicious and dread! Something far away from a puny and pious life! Something unproved! Something in a trance! Something escaped from the anchorage, and driving free. O to work in mines, or forging iron! Foundry casting！the foundry itself！the rude high roof！the ample and shadow¨d space, The furnace！the hot liquid pour¨d out and running. O to resume the joys of the soldier: To feel the presence of a brave general! to feel his sympathy! To behold his calmness! to be warm¨d in the rays of his smile! To go to battle! to hear the bugles play, and the drums beat! To hear the crash of artillery! to see the glittering of the bayonets and musket-barrels in the sun! To see men fall and die, and not complain! To taste the savage taste of blood! to be so devilish! To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy. O the whaleman¨s joys! O I cruise my old cruise again! I feel the ship¨s motion under me！I feel the Atlantic breezes fanning me, I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head！There！she blows! ！Again I spring up the rigging, to look with the rest！We see！we descend, wild with excitement, I leap in the lower¨d boat！We row toward our prey, where he lies, We approach, stealthy and silent！I see the mountainous mass, lethargic, basking, I see the harpooneer standing up！I see the weapon dart from his vigorous arm: O swift, again, now, far out in the ocean, the wounded whale, settling, running to windward, tows me ！Again I see him rise to breathe！We row close again, I see a lance driven through his side, press¨d deep, turn¨d in the wound, Again we back off！I see him settle again！the life is leaving him fast, As he rises, he spouts blood！I see him swim in circles narrower and narrower, swiftly cutting the water！I see him die He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the circle, and then falls flat and still in the bloody foam. O the old manhood of me, my joy! My children and grand-children！my white hair and beard, My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long stretch of my life. O the ripen¨d joy of womanhood! O perfect happiness at last! I am more than eighty years of age！my hair, too, is pure white！I am the most venerable mother How clear is my mind! how all people draw nigh to me! What attractions are these, beyond any before? what bloom, more than the bloom of youth? What beauty is this that descends upon me, and rises out of me? O the orator¨s joys! To inflate the chest！to roll the thunder of the voice out from the ribs and throat, To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with yourself, To lead America！to quell America with a great tongue. O the joy of my soul leaning pois¨d on itself！receiving identity through materials, and loving them！observing characters, and absorbing them O my soul, vibrated back to me, from them！from facts, sight, hearing, touch, my phrenology, reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and the like The real life of my senses and flesh, transcending my senses and flesh My body, done with materials！my sight, done with my material eyes Proved to me this day, beyond cavil, that it is not my material eyes which finally see, Nor my material body which finally loves, walks, laughs, shouts, embraces, procreates. O the farmer¨s joys! Ohioan¨s, Illinoisian¨s, Wisconsinese¨, Kanadian¨s, Iowan¨s, Kansian¨s, Missourian¨s, Oregonese¨ joys To rise at peep of day, and pass forth nimbly to work, To plow land in the fall for winter-sown crops, To plough land in the spring for maize, To train orchards！to graft the trees！to gather apples in the fall. O the pleasure with trees! The orchard！the forest！the oak, cedar, pine, pekan-tree, The honey-locust, black-walnut, cottonwood, and magnolia. O Death! the voyage of Death! The beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing a few moments, for reasons Myself, discharging my excrementitious body, to be burn¨d, or render¨d to powder, or buried, My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres, My voided body, nothing more to me, returning to the purifications, further offices, eternal uses of the earth. O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good place along shore! To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep！to race naked along the shore. O to realize space! The plenteousness of all！that there are no bounds To emerge, and be of the sky！of the sun and moon, and the flying clouds, as one with them. O the joy of a manly self-hood! Personality！to be servile to none！to defer to none！not to any tyrant, known or unknown, To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic, To look with calm gaze, or with a flashing eye, To speak with a full and sonorous voice, out of a broad chest, To confront with your personality all the other personalities of the earth. Know¨st thou the excellent joys of youth? Joys of the dear companions, and of the merry word, and laughing face? Joys of the glad, light-beaming day！joy of the wide-breath¨d games? Joy of sweet music！joy of the lighted ball-room, and the dancers? Joy of the friendly, plenteous dinner！the strong carouse, and drinking? Yet, O my soul supreme! Know¨st thou the joys of pensive thought? Joys of the free and lonesome heart！the tender, gloomy heart? Joy of the solitary walk！the spirit bowed yet proud！the suffering and the struggle? The agonistic throes, the extasies！joys of the solemn musings, day or night? Joys of the thought of Death！the great spheres Time and Space? Prophetic joys of better, loftier love¨s ideals！the Divine Wife！the sweet, eternal, perfect Comrade? Joys all thine own, undying one！joys worthy thee, O Soul. O, while I live, to be the ruler of life！not a slave, To meet life as a powerful conqueror, No fumes！no ennui！no more complaints, or scornful criticisms. O me repellent and ugly! To these proud laws of the air, the water, and the ground, proving my interior Soul impregnable, And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me. O to attract by more than attraction! How it is I know not！yet behold! the something which obeys none of the rest, It is offensive, never defensive！yet how magnetic it draws. O joy of suffering! To struggle against great odds! to meet enemies undaunted! To be entirely alone with them! to find how much one can stand! To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, death, face to face! To mount the scaffold! to advance to the muzzles of guns with perfect nonchalance! To be indeed a God! O, to sail to sea in a ship! To leave this steady, unendurable land! To leave the tiresome sameness of the streets, the sidewalks and the houses To leave you, O you solid motionless land, and entering a ship, To sail, and sail, and sail! O to have my life henceforth a poem of new joys! To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on, To be a sailor of the world, bound for all ports, A ship itself, (see indeed these sails I spread to the sun and air,) A swift and swelling ship, full of rich words！full of joys. OUT of the cradle endlessly rocking, Out of the mocking-bird¨s throat, the musical shuttle, Out of the Ninth-month midnight, Over the sterile sands, and the fields beyond, where the child, leaving his bed, wander¨d alone, bare-headed, barefoot, Down from the shower¨d halo, Up from the mystic play of shadows, twining and twisting as if they were alive, Out from the patches of briers and blackberries, From the memories of the bird that chanted to me, From your memories, sad brother！from the fitful risings and fallings I heard, From under that yellow half-moon, late-risen, and swollen as if with tears, From those beginning notes of sickness and love, there in the transparent mist, From the thousand responses of my heart, never to cease, From the myriad thence-arous¨d words, From the word stronger and more delicious than any, From such, as now they start, the scene revisiting, As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing, Borne hither！ere all eludes me, hurriedly, A man！yet by these tears a little boy again, Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves, I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter, Taking all hints to use them！but swiftly leaping beyond them, A reminiscence sing. Once, Paumanok, When the snows had melted！when the lilac-scent was in the air, and the Fifth-month grass was growing, Up this sea-shore, in some briers, Two guests from Alabama！two together, And their nest, and four light-green eggs, spotted with brown, And every day the he-bird, to and fro, near at hand, And every day the she-bird, crouch¨d on her nest, silent, with bright eyes, And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing them, Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating. Shine! shine! shine! Pour down your warmth, great Sun! While we bask！we two together. Two together! Winds blow South, or winds blow North, Day come white, or night come black, Home, or rivers and mountains from home, Singing all time, minding no time, While we two keep together. Till of a sudden, May-be kill¨d, unknown to her mate, One forenoon the she-bird crouch¨d not on the nest, Nor return¨d that afternoon, nor the next, Nor ever appear¨d again. And thenceforward, all summer, in the sound of the sea, And at night, under the full of the moon, in calmer weather, Over the hoarse surging of the sea, Or flitting from brier to brier by day, I saw, I heard at intervals, the remaining one, the he-bird, The solitary guest from Alabama. Blow! blow! blow! Blow up, sea-winds, along Paumanok¨s shore! I wait and I wait, till you blow my mate to me. Yes, when the stars glisten¨d, All night long, on the prong of a moss-scallop¨d stake, Down, almost amid the slapping waves, Sat the lone singer, wonderful, causing tears. He call¨d on his mate He pour¨d forth the meanings which I, of all men, know. Yes, my brother, I know The rest might not！but I have treasur¨d every note For once, and more than once, dimly, down to the beach gliding, Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows, Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights after their sorts, The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing, I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair, Listen¨d long and long. Listen¨d, to keep, to sing！now translating the notes, Following you, my brother. Soothe! soothe! soothe! Close on its wave soothes the wave behind, And again another behind, embracing and lapping, every one close, But my love soothes not me, not me. Low hangs the moon！it rose late O it is lagging！O I think it is heavy with love, with love. O madly the sea pushes, pushes upon the land, With love！with love. O night! do I not see my love fluttering out there among the breakers? What is that little black thing I see there in the white? Loud! loud! loud! Loud I call to you, my love! High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves Surely you must know who is here, is here You must know who I am, my love. Low-hanging moon! What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow? O it is the shape, the shape of my mate! O moon, do not keep her from me any longer. Land! land! O land! Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again, if you only would For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look. O rising stars! Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you. O throat! O trembling throat! Sound clearer through the atmosphere! Pierce the woods, the earth Somewhere listening to catch you, must be the one I want. Shake out, carols! Solitary here！the night¨s carols! Carols of lonesome love! Death¨s carols! Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon! O, under that moon, where she droops almost down into the sea! O reckless, despairing carols. But soft! sink low Soft! let me just murmur And do you wait a moment, you husky-noised sea For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me, So faint！I must be still, be still to listen But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me. Hither, my love! Here I am! Here! With this just-sustain¨d note I announce myself to you This gentle call is for you, my love, for you. Do not be decoy¨d elsewhere! That is the whistle of the wind！it is not my voice That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray Those are the shadows of leaves. O darkness! O in vain! O I am very sick and sorrowful. O brown halo in the sky, near the moon, drooping upon the sea! O troubled reflection in the sea! O throat! O throbbing heart! O all！and I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night. Yet I murmur, murmur on! O murmurs！you yourselves make me continue to sing, I know not why. O past! O life! O songs of joy! In the air！in the woods！over fields Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved! But my love no more, no more with me! We two together no more. The aria sinking All else continuing！the stars shining, The winds blowing！the notes of the bird continuous echoing, With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning, On the sands of Paumanok¨s shore, gray and rustling The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of the sea almost touching The boy extatic！with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the atmosphere dallying, The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously bursting, The aria¨s meaning, the ears, the Soul, swiftly depositing, The strange tears down the cheeks coursing, The colloquy there！the trio！each uttering, The undertone！the savage old mother, incessantly crying, To the boy¨s Soul¨s questions sullenly timing！some drown¨d secret hissing, To the outsetting bard of love. Demon or bird! (said the boy¨s soul,) Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it mostly to me? For I, that was a child, my tongue¨s use sleeping, Now I have heard you, Now in a moment I know what I am for！I awake, And already a thousand singers！a thousand songs, clearer, louder and more sorrowful than yours, A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, Never to die. O you singer, solitary, singing by yourself！projecting me O solitary me, listening！nevermore shall I cease perpetuating you Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations, Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me, Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what there, in the night, By the sea, under the yellow and sagging moon, The messenger there arous¨d！the fire, the sweet hell within, The unknown want, the destiny of me. O give me the clew! (it lurks in the night here somewhere) O if I am to have so much, let me have more! O a word! O what is my destination? (I fear it is henceforth chaos) O how joys, dreads, convolutions, human shapes, and all shapes, spring as from graves around me! O phantoms! you cover all the land and all the sea! O I cannot see in the dimness whether you smile or frown upon me O vapor, a look, a word! O well-beloved! O you dear women¨s and men¨s phantoms! A word then, (for I will conquer it,) The word final, superior to all, Subtle, sent up！what is it?！I listen Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves? Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands? Whereto answering, the sea, Delaying not, hurrying not, Whisper¨d me through the night, and very plainly before day-break, Lisp¨d to me the low and delicious word DEATH And again Death！ever Death, Death, Death, Hissing melodious, neither like the bird, nor like my arous¨d child¨s heart, But edging near, as privately for me, rustling at my feet, Creeping thence steadily up to my ears, and laving me softly all over, Death, Death, Death, Death, Death. Which I do not forget, But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother, That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok¨s gray beach, With the thousand responsive songs, at random, My own songs, awaked from that hour And with them the key, the word up from the waves, The word of the sweetest song, and all songs, That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet, The sea whisper¨d me. I SING the Body electric The armies of those I love engirth me, and I engirth them They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them, And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the Soul. Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead? And if the body does not do as much as the Soul? And if the body were not the Soul, what is the Soul? The love of the Body of man or woman balks account！the body itself balks account That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect. The expression of the face balks account But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of his hips and wrists It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist and knees！dress does not hide him The strong, sweet, supple quality he has, strikes through the cotton and flannel To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side. The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the contour of their shape downwards, The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up, and rolls silently to and fro in the heave of the water, The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats！the horseman in his saddle, Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances, The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting, The female soothing a child！the farmer¨s daughter in the garden or cow-yard, The young fellow hoeing corn！the sleigh-driver guiding his six horses through the crowd, The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty, good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sundown, after work, The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance, The upper-hold and the under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps, The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes suddenly again, and the listening on the alert, The natural, perfect, varied attitudes！the bent head, the curv¨d neck, and the counting Such-like I love！I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother¨s breast with the little child, Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with the firemen, and pause, listen, and count. I know a man, a common farmer！the father of five sons And in them were the fathers of sons！and in them were the fathers of sons. This man was of wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and beard, and the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes！the richness and breadth of his manners, These I used to go and visit him to see！he was wise also He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old！his sons were massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome They and his daughters loved him！all who saw him loved him They did not love him by allowance！they loved him with personal love He drank water only！the blood show¨d like scarlet through the clear-brown skin of his face He was a frequent gunner and fisher！he sail¨d his boat himself！he had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner！he had fowling-pieces, presented to him by men that loved him When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish, you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang. You would wish long and long to be with him！you would wish to sit by him in the boat, that you and he might touch each other. I have perceiv¨d that to be with those I like is enough, To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough, To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough, To pass among them, or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly round his or her neck for a moment！what is this, then? I do not ask any more delight！I swim in it, as in a sea. There is something in staying close to men and women, and looking on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well All things please the soul！but these please the soul well. This is the female form A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction! I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor！all falls aside but myself and it Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, the atmosphere and the clouds, and what was expected of heaven or fear¨d of hell, are now consumed Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it！the response likewise ungovernable Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands, all diffused！mine too diffused Ebb stung by the flow, and flow stung by the ebb！love-flesh swelling and deliciously aching Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of love, white-blow and delirious juice Bridegroom night of love, working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn Undulating into the willing and yielding day, Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh¨d day. This is the nucleus！after the child is born of woman, the man is born of woman This is the bath of birth！this is the merge of small and large, and the outlet again. Be not ashamed, women！your privilege encloses the rest, and is the exit of the rest You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul. The female contains all qualities, and tempers them！she is in her place, and moves with perfect balance She is all things duly veil¨d！she is both passive and active She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters. As I see my soul reflected in nature As I see through a mist, one with inexpressible completeness and beauty, See the bent head, and arms folded over the breast！the female I see. The male is not less the soul, nor more！he too is in his place He too is all qualities！he is action and power The flush of the known universe is in him Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is utmost, become him well！pride is for him The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul Knowledge becomes him！he likes it always！he brings everything to the test of himself Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail, he strikes soundings at last only here (Where else does he strike soundings, except here?) The man¨s body is sacred, and the woman¨s body is sacred No matter who it is, it is sacred Is it a slave? Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf? Each belongs here or anywhere, just as much as the well-off！just as much as you Each has his or her place in the procession. (All is a procession The universe is a procession, with measured and beautiful motion.) Do you know so much yourself, that you call the slave or the dull-face ignorant? Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has no right to a sight? Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float！and the soil is on the surface, and water runs, and vegetation sprouts, For you only, and not for him and her? A man¨s Body at auction I help the auctioneer！the sloven does not half know his business. Gentlemen, look on this wonder! Whatever the bids of the bidders, they cannot be high enough for it For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years, without one animal or plant For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll¨d. In this head the all-baffling brain In it and below it, the makings of heroes. Examine these limbs, red, black, or white！they are so cunning in tendon and nerve They shall be stript, that you may see them. Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition, Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant back-bone and neck, flesh not flabby, good-sized arms and legs, And wonders within there yet. Within there runs blood, The same old blood! The same red-running blood! There swells and jets a heart！there all passions, desires, reachings, aspirations Do you think they are not there because they are not express¨d in parlors and lecture-rooms? This is not only one man！this is the father of those who shall be fathers in their turns In him the start of populous states and rich republics Of him countless immortal lives, with countless embodiments and enjoyments. How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring through the centuries? Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace back through the centuries? A woman¨s Body at auction! She too is not only herself！she is the teeming mother of mothers She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers. Have you ever loved the Body of a woman? Have you ever loved the Body of a man? Your father！where is your father? Your mother！is she living? have you been much with her? and has she been much with you? ！Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all, in all nations and times, all over the earth? If any thing is sacred, the human body is sacred, And the glory and sweet of a man, is the token of manhood untainted And in man or woman, a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is beautiful as the most beautiful face. Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool that corrupted her own live body? For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves. O my Body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and women, nor the likes of the parts of you I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of the Soul, (and that they are the Soul) I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems！and that they are poems, Man¨s, woman¨s, child¨s, youth¨s, wife¨s, husband¨s, mother¨s, father¨s, young man¨s, young woman¨s poems Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears, Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eye-brows, and the waking or sleeping of the lids, Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges, Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition, Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue, Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the ample side-round of the chest. Upper-arm, arm-pit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones, Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, fore-finger, finger-balls, finger-joints, finger-nails, Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side, Ribs, belly, back-bone, joints of the back-bone, Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round, man-balls, man-root, Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above, Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under leg, Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your body, or of any one¨s body, male or female, The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean, The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame, Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity, Womanhood, and all that is a woman！and the man that comes from woman, The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping, love-looks, love-perturbations and risings, The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud, Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming, Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening, The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes, The skin, the sun-burnt shade, freckles, hair, The curious sympathy one feels, when feeling with the hand the naked meat of the body, The circling rivers, the breath, and breathing it in and out, The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward toward the knees, The thin red jellies within you, or within me！the bones, and the marrow in the bones, The exquisite realization of health O I say, these are not the parts and poems of the Body only, but of the Soul, O I say now these are the Soul! 