WHETHER on Ida's shady brow Or in the chambers of the East The chambers of the Sun that now From ancient melody have ceased Whether in heaven ye wander fair Or the green corners of the earth Or the blue regions of the air Where the melodious winds have birth Whether on crystal rocks ye rove Beneath the bosom of the sea Wandering in many a coral grove Fair Nine forsaking Poetry How have you left the ancient love That bards of old enjoy'd in you! The languid strings do scarcely move The sound is forced the notes are few. O THOU with dewy locks who lookest down Through the clear windows of the morning turn Thine angel eyes upon our western isle Which in full choir hails thy approach O Spring! The hills tell one another and the listening Valleys hear all our longing eyes are turn'd Up to thy bright pavilions: issue forth And let thy holy feet visit our clime! Come o'er the eastern hills and let our winds Kiss thy perfum┬d garments let us taste Thy morn and evening breath scatter thy pearls Upon our lovesick land that mourns for thee. O deck her forth with thy fair fingers pour Thy soft kisses on her bosom and put Thy golden crown upon her languish'd head Whose modest tresses are bound up for thee. MY silks and fine array My smiles and languish'd air By Love are driven away And mournful lean Despair Brings me yew to deck my grave: Such end true lovers have. His face is fair as heaven When springing buds unfold: O why to him was 't given Whose heart is wintry cold? His breast is Love's all-worshipp'd tomb Where all Love's pilgrims come. Bring me an axe and spade Bring me a winding-sheet When I my grave have made Let winds and tempests beat: Then down I'll lie as cold as clay: True love doth pass away! PIPING down the valleys wild Piping songs of pleasant glee On a cloud I saw a child And he laughing said to me: 'Pipe a song about a Lamb!' So I piped with merry cheer. 'Piper pipe that song again' So I piped: he wept to hear. 'Drop thy pipe thy happy pipe Sing thy songs of happy cheer!' So I sung the same again While he wept with joy to hear. 'Piper sit thee down and write In a book that all may read.' So he vanish'd from my sight And I pluck'd a hollow reed And I made a rural pen And I stain'd the water clear And I wrote my happy songs Every child may joy to hear. MY mother bore me in the southern wild, And I am black, but O, my soul is white! White as an angel is the English child, But I am black, as if bereaved of light. My mother taught me underneath a tree, And, sitting down before the heat of day, She took me on her lap and kiss┬d me, And, pointing to the East, began to say: 'Look at the rising sun: there God does live, And gives His light, and gives His heat away, And flowers and trees and beasts and men receive Comfort in morning, joy in the noonday. 'And we are put on earth a little space, That we may learn to bear the beams of love And these black bodies and this sunburnt face Are but a cloud, and like a shady grove. 'For when our souls have learn'd the heat to bear, The cloud will vanish we shall hear His voice, Saying, "Come out from the grove, my love and care, And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice."' Thus did my mother say, and kiss┬d me, And thus I say to little English boy. When I from black and he from white cloud free, And round the tent of God like lambs we joy, I'll shade him from the heat till he can bear To lean in joy upon our Father's knee And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair, And be like him, and he will then love me. HEAR the voice of the Bard Who present past and future sees Whose ears have heard The Holy Word That walk'd among the ancient trees Calling the laps┬d soul And weeping in the evening dew That might control The starry pole And fallen fallen light renew! 'O Earth O Earth return! Arise from out the dewy grass! Night is worn And the morn Rises from the slumbrous mass. 'Turn away no more Why wilt thou turn away? The starry floor The watery shore Is given thee till the break of day.' TIGER tiger burning bright In the forests of the night What immortal hand or eye Could frame thy fearful symmetry? In what distant deeps or skies Burnt the fire of thine eyes? On what wings dare he aspire? What the hand dare seize the fire? And what shoulder and what art Could twist the sinews of thy heart? And when thy heart began to beat What dread hand and what dread feet? What the hammer? what the chain? In what furnace was thy brain? What the anvil? What dread grasp Dare its deadly terrors clasp? When the stars threw down their spears And water'd heaven with their tears Did He smile His work to see? Did He who made the lamb make thee? Tiger tiger burning bright In the forests of the night What immortal hand or eye Dare frame thy fearful symmetry? SLEEP sleep beauty bright Dreaming in the joys of night Sleep sleep in thy sleep Little sorrows sit and weep. Sweet babe in thy face Soft desires I can trace Secret joys and secret smiles Little pretty infant wiles. As thy softest limbs I feel Smiles as of the morning steal O'er thy cheek and o'er thy breast Where thy little heart doth rest. O the cunning wiles that creep In thy little heart asleep! When thy little heart doth wake Then the dreadful night shall break. THE sun descending in the west The evening star does shine The birds are silent in their nest. And I must seek for mine. The moon like a flower In heaven's high bower With silent delight Sits and smiles on the night. Farewell green fields and happy grove Where flocks have took delight: Where lambs have nibbled silent move The feet of angels bright Unseen they pour blessing And joy without ceasing On each bud and blossom And each sleeping bosom. They look in every thoughtless nest Where birds are cover'd warm They visit caves of every beast To keep them all from harm: If they see any weeping That should have been sleeping They pour sleep on their head And sit down by their bed. When wolves and tigers howl for prey They pitying stand and weep Seeking to drive their thirst away And keep them from the sheep. But if they rush dreadful The angels most heedful Receive each mild spirit New worlds to inherit. And there the lion's ruddy eyes Shall flow with tears of gold: And pitying the tender cries And walking round the fold: Saying 'Wrath by His meekness And by His health sickness Are driven away From our immortal day. 'And now beside thee bleating lamb I can lie down and sleep Or think on Him who bore thy name Graze after thee and weep. For wash'd in life's river My bright mane for ever Shall shine like the gold As I guard o'er the fold.' NEVER seek to tell thy love Love that never told can be For the gentle wind doth move Silently invisibly. I told my love I told my love I told her all my heart Trembling cold in ghastly fears. Ah! she did depart! Soon after she was gone from me A traveller came by Silently invisibly: He took her with a sigh. I LEFT thee last a child at heart A woman scarce in years: I come to thee a solemn corpse Which neither feels nor fears. I have no breath to use in sighs They laid the dead-weights on mine eyes To seal them safe from tears. Look on me with thine own calm look: I meet it calm as thou. No look of thine can change this smile Or break thy sinful vow: I tell thee that my poor scorn'd heart Is of thine earth！thine earth！a part: It cannot vex thee now. I have pray'd for thee with bursting sob When passion's course was free I have pray'd for thee with silent lips In the anguish none could see They whisper'd oft 'She sleepeth soft'！ But I only pray'd for thee. Go to! I pray for thee no more: The corpse's tongue is still Its folded fingers point to heaven But point there stiff and chill: No farther wrong no farther woe Hath licence from the sin below Its tranquil heart to thrill. I charge thee by the living's prayer And the dead's silentness To wring from out thy soul a cry Which God shall hear and bless! Lest Heaven's own palm droop in my hand And pale among the saints I stand A saint companionless. I MIND me in the days departed, How often underneath the sun With childish bounds I used to run To a garden long deserted. The beds and walks were vanish'd quite And wheresoe'er had struck the spade, The greenest grasses Nature laid, To sanctify her right. I call'd the place my wilderness, For no one enter'd there but I. The sheep look'd in, the grass to espy, And pass'd it ne'ertheless. The trees were interwoven wild, And spread their boughs enough about To keep both sheep and shepherd out, But not a happy child. Adventurous joy it was for me! I crept beneath the boughs, and found A circle smooth of mossy ground Beneath a poplar-tree. Old garden rose-trees hedged it in, Bedropt with roses waxen-white, Well satisfied with dew and light, And careless to be seen. Long years ago, it might befall, When all the garden flowers were trim, The grave old gardener prided him On these the most of all. Some Lady, stately overmuch, Here moving with a silken noise, Has blush'd beside them at the voice That liken'd her to such. Or these, to make a diadem, She often may have pluck'd and twined Half-smiling as it came to mind, That few would look at them. O, little thought that Lady proud, A child would watch her fair white rose, When buried lay her whiter brows, And silk was changed for shroud!！ Nor thought that gardener (full of scorns For men unlearn'd and simple phrase) A child would bring it all its praise, By creeping through the thorns! To me upon my low moss seat, Though never a dream the roses sent Of science or love's compliment, I ween they smelt as sweet. It did not move my grief to see The trace of human step departed: Because the garden was deserted, The blither place for me! Friends, blame me not! a narrow ken Hath childhood 'twixt the sun and sward: We draw the moral afterward！ We feel the gladness then. And gladdest hours for me did glide In silence at the rose-tree wall: A thrush made gladness musical Upon the other side. Nor he nor I did e'er incline To peck or pluck the blossoms white:！ How should I know but that they might Lead lives as glad as mine? To make my hermit-home complete, I brought clear water from the spring Praised in its own low murmuring, And cresses glossy wet. And so, I thought, my likeness grew (Without the melancholy tale) To 'gentle hermit of the dale,' And Angelina too. For oft I read within my nook Such minstrel stories till the breeze Made sounds poetic in the trees, And then I shut the book. If I shut this wherein I write, I hear no more the wind athwart Those trees, nor feel that childish heart Delighting in delight. My childhood from my life is parted, My footstep from the moss which drew Its fairy circle round: anew The garden is deserted. Another thrush may there rehearse The madrigals which sweetest are No more for me!！myself afar Do sing a sadder verse. Ah me! ah me! when erst I lay In that child's-nest so greenly wrought, I laugh'd unto myself and thought, 'The time will pass away.' And still I laugh'd, and did not fear But that, whene'er was pass'd away The childish time, some happier play My womanhood would cheer. I knew the time would pass away And yet, beside the rose-tree wall, Dear God, how seldom, if at all, Did I look up to pray! The time is past: and now that grows The cypress high among the trees, And I behold white sepulchres As well as the white rose,！ When wiser, meeker thoughts are given, And I have learnt to lift my face, Reminded how earth's greenest place The colour draws from heaven,！ It something saith for earthly pain, But more for heavenly promise free, That I who was, would shrink to be That happy child again. ALL are not taken there are left behind Living Belov┬ds tender looks to bring And make the daylight still a happy thing And tender voices to make soft the wind: But if it were not so！if I could find No love in all this world for comforting Nor any path but hollowly did ring Where 'dust to dust' the love from life disjoin'd And if before those sepulchres unmoving I stood alone (as some forsaken lamb Goes bleating up the moors in weary dearth) Crying 'Where are ye O my loved and loving?'！ I know a voice would sound 'Daughter I AM. Can I suffice for Heaven and not for earth?' I TELL you hopeless grief is passionless That only men incredulous of despair Half-taught in anguish through the midnight air Beat upward to God's throne in loud access Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness In souls as countries lieth silent-bare Under the blanching vertical eye-glare Of the absolute Heavens. Deep-hearted man express Grief for thy Dead in silence like to death！ Most like a monumental statue set In everlasting watch and moveless woe Till itself crumble to the dust beneath. Touch it the marble eyelids are not wet: If it could weep it could arise and go. i I THOUGHT once how Theocritus had sung Of the sweet years the dear and wish'd-for years Who each one in a gracious hand appears To bear a gift for mortals old or young: And as I mused it in his antique tongue I saw in gradual vision through my tears The sweet sad years the melancholy years！ Those of my own life who by turns had flung A shadow across me. Straightway I was 'ware So weeping how a mystic Shape did move Behind me and drew me backward by the hair And a voice said in mastery while I strove 'Guess now who holds thee?'！'Death ' I said. But there The silver answer rang！'Not Death but Love.' ii UNLIKE are we unlike O princely Heart! Unlike our uses and our destinies. Our ministering two angels look surprise On one another as they strike athwart Their wings in passing. Thou bethink thee art A guest for queens to social pageantries With gages from a hundred brighter eyes Than tears even can make mine to play thy part Of chief musician. What hast thou to do With looking from the lattice-lights at me！ A poor tired wandering singer singing through The dark and leaning up a cypress tree? The chrism is on thine head！on mine the dew！ And Death must dig the level where these agree. iii GO from me. Yet I feel that I shall stand Henceforward in thy shadow. Nevermore Alone upon the threshold of my door Of individual life I shall command The uses of my soul nor lift my hand Serenely in the sunshine as before Without the sense of that which I forbore！ Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land Doom takes to part us leaves thy heart in mine With pulses that beat double. What I do And what I dream include thee as the wine Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue God for myself He hears that name of thine And sees within my eyes the tears of two. iv IF thou must love me let it be for naught Except for love's sake only. Do not say 'I love her for her smile！her look！her way Of speaking gently ！for a trick of thought That falls in well with mine and certes brought A sense of pleasant ease on such a day'！ For these things in themselves Belov┬d may Be changed or change for thee！and love so wrought May be unwrought so. Neither love me for Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry: A creature might forget to weep who bore Thy comfort long and lose thy love thereby! But love me for love's sake that evermore Thou mayst love on through love's eternity. v WHEN our two souls stand up erect and strong Face to face silent drawing nigh and nigher Until the lengthening wings break into fire At either curving point ！what bitter wrong Can the earth do us that we should not long Be here contented? Think! In mounting higher The angels would press on us and aspire To drop some golden orb of perfect song Into our deep dear silence. Let us stay Rather on earth Belov┬d！where the unfit Contrarious moods of men recoil away And isolate pure spirits and permit A place to stand and love in for a day With darkness and the death-hour rounding it. WHAT was he doing the great god Pan Down in the reeds by the river? Spreading ruin and scattering ban Splashing and paddling with hoofs of a goat And breaking the golden lilies afloat With the dragon-fly on the river. He tore out a reed the great god Pan From the deep cool bed of the river The limpid water turbidly ran And the broken lilies a-dying lay And the dragon-fly had fled away Ere he brought it out of the river. High on the shore sat the great god Pan While turbidly flow'd the river And hack'd and hew'd as a great god can With his hard bleak steel at the patient reed Till there was not a sign of the leaf indeed To prove it fresh from the river. He cut it short did the great god Pan (How tall it stood in the river!) Then drew the pith like the heart of a man Steadily from the outside ring And notch'd the poor dry empty thing In holes as he sat by the river. 'This is the way ' laugh'd the great god Pan (Laugh'd while he sat by the river) 'The only way since gods began To make sweet music they could succeed.' Then dropping his mouth to a hole in the reed He blew in power by the river. Sweet sweet sweet O Pan! Piercing sweet by the river! Blinding sweet O great god Pan! The sun on the hill forgot to die And the lilies revived and the dragon-fly Came back to dream on the river. Yet half a beast is the great god Pan To laugh as he sits by the river Making a poet out of a man: The true gods sigh for the cost and pain！ For the reed which grows nevermore again As a reed with the reeds of the river. O TALK not to me of a name great in story The days of our youth are the days of our glory And the myrtle and ivy of sweet two-and-twenty Are worth all your laurels though ever so plenty. What are garlands and crowns to the brow that is wrinkled? 'Tis but as a dead flower with May-dew besprinkled: Then away with all such from the head that is hoary！ What care I for the wreaths that can only give glory? O Fame! if I e'er took delight in thy praises 'Twas less for the sake of thy high-sounding phrases Than to see the bright eyes of the dear one discover She thought that I was not unworthy to love her. There chiefly I sought thee there only I found thee Her glance was the best of the rays that surround thee When it sparkled o'er aught that was bright in my story I knew it was love and I felt it was glory. THERE be none of Beauty's daughters With a magic like thee And like music on the waters Is thy sweet voice to me: When as if its sound were causing The charmed ocean's pausing The waves lie still and gleaming And the lull'd winds seem dreaming: And the midnight moon is weaving Her bright chain o'er the deep Whose breast is gently heaving As an infant's asleep: So the spirit bows before thee To listen and adore thee With a full but soft emotion Like the swell of summer's ocean. SHE walks in beauty like the night Of cloudless climes and starry skies And all that's best of dark and bright Meets in her aspect and her eyes Thus mellow'd to that tender light Which Heaven to gaudy day denies. One shade the more one ray the less Had half impair'd the nameless grace Which waves in every raven tress Or softly lightens o'er her face Where thoughts serenely sweet express How pure how dear their dwelling-place. And on that cheek and o'er that brow So soft so calm yet eloquent The smiles that win the tints that glow But tell of days in goodness spent ！ A mind at peace with all below A heart whose love is innocent. WHEN we two parted In silence and tears Half broken-hearted To sever for years Pale grew thy cheek and cold Colder thy kiss Truly that hour foretold Sorrow to this! The dew of the morning Sunk chill on my brow It felt like the warning Of what I feel now. Thy vows are all broken And light is thy fame: I hear thy name spoken And share in its shame. They name thee before me A knell to mine ear A shudder comes o'er me！ Why wert thou so dear? They know not I knew thee Who knew thee too well: Long long shall I rue thee Too deeply to tell. In secret we met: In silence I grieve That thy heart could forget Thy spirit deceive. If I should meet thee After long years How should I greet thee?！ With silence and tears. AND thou art dead as young and fair As aught of mortal birth And form so soft and charms so rare Too soon return'd to Earth! Though Earth received them in her bed And o'er the spot the crowd may tread In carelessness or mirth There is an eye which could not brook A moment on that grave to look. I will not ask where thou liest low Nor gaze upon the spot There flowers or weeds at will may grow So I behold them not: It is enough for me to prove That what I loved and long must love Like common earth can rot To me there needs no stone to tell 'Tis Nothing that I loved so well. Yet did I love thee to the last As fervently as thou Who didst not change through all the past And canst not alter now. The love where Death has set his seal Nor age can chill nor rival steal Nor falsehood disavow And what were worse thou canst not see Or wrong or change or fault in me. The better days of life were ours The worst can be but mine The sun that cheers the storm that lours Shall never more be thine. The silence of that dreamless sleep I envy now too much to weep Nor need I to repine That all those charms have pass'd away I might have watch'd through long decay. The flower in ripen'd bloom unmatch'd Must fall the earliest prey Though by no hand untimely snatch'd. The leaves must drop away. And yet it were a greater grief To watch it withering leaf by leaf Than see it pluck'd to-day Since earthly eye but ill can bear To trace the change to foul from fair. I know not if I could have borne To see thy beauties fade The night that follow'd such a morn Had worn a deeper shade. Thy day without a cloud hath pass'd And thou wert lovely to the last Extinguish'd not decay'd As stars that shoot along the sky Shine brightest as they fall from high. As once I wept if I could weep My tears might well be shed To think I was not near to keep One vigil o'er thy bed！ To gaze how fondly! on thy face To fold thee in a faint embrace Uphold thy drooping head And show that love however vain Nor thou nor I can feel again. Yet how much less it were to gain Though thou hast left me free The loveliest things that still remain Than thus remember thee! The all of thine that cannot die Through dark and dread eternity Returns again to me And more thy buried love endears Than aught except its living years. ETERNAL Spirit of the chainless Mind! Brightest in dungeons Liberty! thou art For there thy habitation is the heart！ The heart which love of Thee alone can bind. And when thy sons to fetters are consign'd To fetters and the damp vault's dayless gloom Their country conquers with their martyrdom And Freedom's fame finds wings on every wind. Chillon! thy prison is a holy place And thy sad floor an altar for 'twas trod Until his very steps have left a trace Worn as if thy cold pavement were a sod By Bonnivard! May none those marks efface! For they appeal from tyranny to God. THERE'S not a joy the world can give like that it takes away When the glow of early thought declines in feeling's dull decay 'Tis not on youth's smooth cheek the blush alone which fades so fast But the tender bloom of heart is gone ere youth itself be past. Then the few whose spirits float above the wreck of happiness Are driven o'er the shoals of guilt or ocean of excess: The magnet of their course is gone or only points in vain The shore to which their shiver'd sail shall never stretch again. Then the mortal coldness of the soul like death itself comes down It cannot feel for others' woes it dare not dream its own That heavy chill has frozen o'er the fountain of our tears And though the eye may sparkle still 'tis where the ice appears. Though wit may flash from fluent lips and mirth distract the breast Through midnight hours that yield no more their former hope of rest 'Tis but as ivy-leaves around the ruin'd turret wreathe All green and wildly fresh without but worn and gray beneath. Oh could I feel as I have felt or be what I have been Or weep as I could once have wept o'er many a vanish'd scene ！ As springs in deserts found seem sweet all brackish though they be So midst the wither'd waste of life those tears would flow to me! OH snatch'd away in beauty's bloom! On thee shall press no ponderous tomb But on thy turf shall roses rear Their leaves the earliest of the year And the wild cypress wave in tender gloom: And oft by yon blue gushing stream Shall Sorrow lean her drooping head And feed deep thought with many a dream And lingering pause and lightly tread Fond wretch! as if her step disturb'd the dead! Away! we know that tears are vain That Death nor heeds nor hears distress: Will this unteach us to complain? Or make one mourner weep the less? And thou who tell'st me to forget Thy looks are wan thine eyes are wet. Your eyen two wol slee me sodenly, I may the beaute of hem not sustene, So woundeth hit through-out my herte kene. And but your word wol helen hastily My hertes wounde, whyl that hit is grene, Your eyen two wol slee me sodenly, I may the beaute of hem not sustene. Upon my trouthe I sey yow feithfully, That ye ben of my lyf and deeth the quene For with my deeth the trouthe shal be sene. Your eyen two wol slee me sodenly, I may the beaute of hem not sustene, So woundeth hit through-out my herte kene. So hath your beaute fro your herte chaced Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne For Daunger halt your mercy in his cheyne. Giltles my deeth thus han ye me purchaced I sey yow sooth, me nedeth not to feyne So hath your beaute fro your herte chaced Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne. Allas! that nature hath in yow compassed So greet beaute, that no man may atteyne To mercy, though he sterve for the peyne. So hath your beaute fro your herte chaced Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne For Daunger halt your mercy in his cheyne. Sin I fro Love escaped am so fat, I never thenk to ben in his prison lene Sin I am free, I counte him not a bene. He may answere, and seye this or that I do no fors, I speke right as I mene. Sin I fro Love escaped am so fat, I never thenk to ben in his prison lene. Love hath my name y-strike out of his sclat, And he is strike out of my bokes clene For ever-mo ther is non other mene. Sin I fro Love escaped am so fat, I never thenk to ben in his prison lene Sin I am free, I counte him not a bene. Compleyne ne koude, ne might myn herte never, My peynes halve, ne what torment I have, Though that I sholde in your presence ben ever, Myn hertes lady, as wisly he me save That Bountee made, and Beautee list to grave In your persone, and bad hem bothe in-fere Ever t'awayte, and ay be wher ye were. As wisly he gye alle my joyes here As I am youres, and to yow sad and trewe, And ye, my lyf and cause of my gode chere, And deeth also, whan ye my peynes newe, My worldes joye, whom I wol serve and sewe, Myn heven hool, and al my suffisaunce, Whom for to serve is set al my plesaunce. Beseching yow in my most humble wyse T'accepte in worth this litel pore dyte, And for my trouthe my servyce not despyse, Myn observaunce eke have not in despyte, Ne yit to longe to suffren in this plyte I yow beseche, myn hertes lady, here, Sith I yow serve, and so wil yeer by yere. The firste stock-father of gentleness, What man desireth gentle for to be, Must follow his trace, and all his wittes dress, Virtue to love, and vices for to flee For unto virtue longeth dignity, And not the reverse, safely dare I deem, All wear he mitre, crown, or diademe. This firste stock was full of righteousness, True of his word, sober, pious, and free, Clean of his ghost, and loved business, Against the vice of sloth, in honesty And, but his heir love virtue as did he, He is not gentle, though he riche seem, All wear he mitre, crown, or diademe. Vice may well be heir to old richess, But there may no man, as men may well see, Bequeath his heir his virtuous nobless That is appropried to no degree, But to the first Father in majesty, Which makes his heire him that doth him queme, All wear he mitre, crown, or diademe. Incipit carmen secundum ordinem litterarum alphabeti. Almighty and al merciable queene, To whom that al this world fleeth for socour, To have relees of sinne, of sorwe, and teene, Glorious virgine, of alle floures flour, To thee I flee, confounded in errour. Help and releeve, thou mighti debonayre, Have mercy on my perilous langour. Venquisshed me hath my cruel adversaire. Bountee so fix hath in thin herte his tente That wel I wot thou wolt my socour bee Thou canst not warne him that with good entente Axeth thin helpe, thin herte is ay so free. Thou art largesse of pleyn felicitee, Haven of refut, of quiete, and of reste. Loo, how that theeves sevene chasen mee. Help, lady bright, er that my ship tobreste.[Riv., p. ] Comfort is noon but in yow, ladi deere For loo, my sinne and my confusioun, Which oughten not in thi presence appeere, Han take on me a greevous accioun Of verrey right and desperacioun And as hi right thei mighten wel susteene That I were wurthi my dampnacioun, Nere merci of you, blisful hevene queene. Dowte is ther noon, thou queen of misericorde, That thou n'art cause of grace and merci heere God vouched sauf thurgh thee with us to accorde. For certes, Crystes blisful mooder deere, Were now the bowe bent in swich maneere As it was first of justice and of ire, The rightful God nolde of no mercy heere But thurgh thee han we grace as we desire. Evere hath myn hope of refut been in thee, For heer-biforn ful ofte in many a wyse Hast thou to misericorde receyved me. But merci, ladi, at the grete assyse Whan we shule come bifore the hye justyse. So litel fruit shal thanne in me be founde That, but thou er that day correcte [vice], Of verrey right my werk wol me confounde. Fleeinge, I flee for socour to thi tente Me for to hide from tempeste ful of dreede, Biseeching yow that ye you not absente Thouh I be wikke. O, help yit at this neede! Al have I ben a beste in wil and deede, Yit, ladi, thou me clothe with thi grace. Thin enemy and myn-- ladi, tak heede-- Unto my deth in poynt is me to chace! Glorious mayde and mooder, which that nevere Were bitter, neither in erthe nor in see, But ful of swetnesse and of merci evere, Help that my Fader be not wroth with me. Spek thou, for I ne dar not him ysee, So have I doon in erthe, allas the while, That certes, but if thou my socour bee, To stink eterne he wole my gost exile. He vouched sauf, tel him, as was his wille, Bicome a man, to have oure alliaunce, And with his precious blood he wrot the bille Upon the crois as general acquitaunce To every penitent in ful creaunce And therfore, ladi bright, thou for us praye. Thanne shalt thou bothe stinte al his grevaunce, And make oure foo to failen of his praye. I wot it wel, thou wolt ben oure socour, Thou art so ful of bowntee, in certeyn, For whan a soule falleth in errour Thi pitee goth and haleth him ayein. Thanne makest thou his pees with his sovereyn And bringest him out of the crooked strete. Whoso thee loveth, he shal not love in veyn, That shal he fynde as he the lyf shal lete. Kalenderes enlumyned ben thei That in this world ben lighted with thi name, And whoso goth to yow the righte wey, Him thar not drede in soule to be lame. Now, queen of comfort, sith thou art that same To whom I seeche for my medicyne, Lat not my foo no more my wounde entame Myn hele into thin hand al I resygne. Ladi, thi sorwe kan I not portreye Under the cros, ne his greevous penaunce But for youre bothes peynes I yow preye, Lat not oure alder foo make his bobaunce That he hath in his lystes of mischaunce Convict that ye bothe have bought so deere. As I seide erst, thou ground of oure substaunce, Continue on us thi pitous eyen cleere! Moises, that saugh the bush with flawmes rede Brenninge, of which ther never a stikke brende, Was signe of thin unwemmed maidenhede.[Riv., p. ] Thou art the bush on which ther gan descende The Holi Gost, the which that Moyses wende Had ben a-fyr, and this was in figure. Now, ladi, from the fyr thou us defende Which that in helle eternalli shal dure. Noble princesse, that nevere haddest peere, Certes if any comfort in us bee, That cometh of thee, thou Cristes mooder deere. We han noon oother melodye or glee Us to rejoyse in oure adversitee, Ne advocat noon that wole and dar so preye For us, and that for litel hire as yee That helpen for an Ave-Marie or tweye. O verrey light of eyen that ben blynde, O verrey lust of labour and distresse, O tresoreere of bountee to mankynde, Thee whom God ches to mooder for humblesse! From his ancille he made the maistresse Of hevene and erthe, oure bille up for to beede. This world awaiteth evere on thi goodnesse For thou ne failest nevere wight at neede. Purpos I have sum time for to enquere Wherfore and whi the Holi Gost thee soughte Whan Gabrielles vois cam to thin ere. He not to werre us swich a wonder wroughte, But for to save us that he sithen boughte. Thanne needeth us no wepen us for to save, But oonly ther we dide not, as us oughte, Doo penitence, and merci axe and have. Queen of comfort, yit whan I me bithinke That I agilt have bothe him and thee, And that my soule is worthi for to sinke, Allas, I caityf, whider may I flee? Who shal unto thi Sone my mene bee? Who, but thiself, that art of pitee welle? Thou hast more reuthe on oure adversitee Than in this world might any tonge telle. Redresse me, mooder, and me chastise, For certeynly my Faderes chastisinge, That dar I nouht abiden in no wise, So hidous is his rightful rekenynge. Mooder, of whom oure merci gan to springe, Beth ye my juge and eek my soules leche For evere in you is pitee haboundinge To ech that wole of pitee you biseeche. Soth is that God ne granteth no pitee Withoute thee for God of his goodnesse Foryiveth noon, but it like unto thee. He hath thee maked vicaire and maistresse Of al this world, and eek governouresse Of hevene, and he represseth his justise After thi wil and therfore in witnesse He hath thee corowned in so rial wise. Temple devout, ther God hath his woninge, Fro which these misbileeved deprived been, To you my soule penitent I bringe. Receyve me-- I can no ferther fleen. With thornes venymous, O hevene queen, For which the eerthe acursed was ful yore, I am so wounded, as ye may wel seen, That I am lost almost, it smert so sore. Virgine, that art so noble of apparaile, And ledest us into the hye tour Of Paradys, thou me wisse and counsaile How I may have thi grace and thi socour, All have I ben in filthe and in errour. Ladi, unto that court thou me ajourne That cleped is thi bench, O freshe flour, Ther as that merci evere shal sojourne. Xristus, thi sone, that in this world alighte Upon the cros to suffre his passioun, And eek that Longius his herte pighte And made his herte blood to renne adoun, And al was this for my salvacioun And I to him am fals and eek unkynde, And yit he wole not my dampnacioun-- This thanke I yow, socour of al mankynde! Ysaac was figure of his deth, certeyn, That so fer forth his fader wolde obeye That him ne roughte nothing to be slayn[Riv., p. ] Right soo thi Sone list as a lamb to deye. Now, ladi ful of merci, I yow preye, Sith he his merci mesured so large, Be ye not skant, for alle we singe and seye That ye ben from vengeaunce ay oure targe. Zacharie yow clepeth the open welle To wasshe sinful soule out of his gilt. Therfore this lessoun oughte I wel to telle, That, nere thi tender herte, we were spilt. Now, ladi bryghte, sith thou canst and wilt Ben to the seed of Adam merciable, Bring us to that palais that is bilt To penitentes that ben to merci able. Amen. O YONGE fresshe folkes, he or she, In which that love up groweth with your age, Repeyreth hoom from worldly vanitee, And of your herte up-casteth the visage To thilke god that after his image Yow made, and thinketh al nis but a fayre This world, that passeth sone as floures fayre. And loveth him, the which that right for love Upon a cros, our soules for to beye, First starf, and roos, and sit in hevene a-bove For he nil falsen no wight, dar I seye, That wol his herte al hoolly on him leye. And sin he best to love is, and most meke, What nedeth feyned loves for to seke? STAY O sweet and do not rise! The light that shines comes from thine eyes The day breaks not: it is my heart Because that you and I must part. Stay! or else my joys will die And perish in their infancy. GO and catch a falling star, Get with child a mandrake root, Tell me where all past years are, Or who cleft the Devil's foot Teach me to hear mermaids singing, Or to keep off envy's stinging, And find What wind Serves to advance an honest mind. If thou be'st born to strange sights, Things invisible to see, Ride ten thousand days and nights Till Age snow white hairs on thee Thou, when thou return'st, wilt tell me All strange wonders that befell thee, And swear No where Lives a woman true and fair. If thou find'st one, let me know Such a pilgrimage were sweet. Yet do not I would not go, Though at next door we might meet. Though she were true when you met her, And last till you write your letter, Yet she Will be False, ere I come, to two or three. Rather helps than hurts to loves ABSENCE hear thou my protestation Against thy strength Distance and length: Do what thou canst for alteration For hearts of truest mettle Absence doth join and Time doth settle. Who loves a mistress of such quality His mind hath found Affection's ground Beyond time place and all mortality. To hearts that cannot vary Absence is present Time doth tarry. My senses want their outward motion Which now within Reason doth win Redoubled by her secret notion: Like rich men that take pleasure In hiding more than handling treasure. By Absence this good means I gain That I can catch her Where none can watch her In some close corner of my brain: There I embrace and kiss her And so enjoy her and none miss her. WHERE like a pillow on a bed A pregnant bank swell'd up to rest The violet's reclining head Sat we two one another's best. Our hands were firmly c┬mented By a fast balm which thence did spring Our eye-beams twisted and did thread Our eyes upon one double string. So to engraft our hands as yet Was all the means to make us one And pictures in our eyes to get Was all our propagation. As 'twixt two equal armies Fate Suspends uncertain victory Our souls！which to advance their state Were gone out！hung 'twixt her and me. And whilst our souls negotiate there We like sepulchral statues lay All day the same our postures were And we said nothing all the day. DEAR love for nothing less than thee Would I have broke this happy dream It was a theme For reason much too strong for fantasy. Therefore thou waked'st me wisely yet My dream thou brok'st not but continued'st it. Thou art so true that thoughts of thee suffice To make dreams truths and fables histories Enter these arms for since thou thought'st it best Not to dream all my dream let 's act the rest. As lightning or a taper's light Thine eyes and not thy noise waked me Yet I thought thee！ For thou lov'st truth！an angel at first sight But when I saw thou saw'st my heart And knew'st my thoughts beyond an angel's art When thou knew'st what I dreamt when thou knew'st when Excess of joy would wake me and cam'st then I must confess it could not choose but be Profane to think thee anything but thee. Coming and staying show'd thee thee But rising makes me doubt that now Thou art not thou. That Love is weak where Fear 's as strong as he 'Tis not all spirit pure and brave If mixture it of Fear Shame Honour have. Perchance as torches which must ready be Men light and put out so thou deal'st with me. Thou cam'st to kindle go'st to come: then I Will dream that hope again but else would die. WHOEVER comes to shroud me do not harm Nor question much That subtle wreath of hair about mine arm The mystery the sign you must not touch For 'tis my outward soul Viceroy to that which unto heav'n being gone Will leave this to control And keep these limbs her provinces from dissolution. For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall Through every part Can tie those parts and make me one of all Those hairs which upward grew and strength and art Have from a better brain Can better do 't: except she meant that I By this should know my pain As prisoners then are manacled when they're condemn'd to die. Whate'er she meant by 't bury it with me For since I am Love's martyr it might breed idolatry If into other hands these reliques came. As 'twas humility T' afford to it all that a soul can do So 'tis some bravery That since you would have none of me I bury some of you. WILT Thou forgive that sin where I begun Which was my sin though it were done before? Wilt Thou forgive that sin through which I run And do run still though still I do deplore? When Thou hast done Thou hast not done For I have more. Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I have won Others to sin and made my sins their door? Wilt Thou forgive that sin which I did shun A year or two but wallow'd in a score? When Thou hast done Thou hast not done For I have more. I have a sin of fear that when I've spun My last thread I shall perish on the shore But swear by Thyself that at my death Thy Son Shall shine as He shines now and heretofore: And having done that Thou hast done I fear no more. DEATH be not proud though some have call┬d thee Mighty and dreadful for thou art not so: For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow Die not poor Death nor yet canst thou kill me. From Rest and Sleep which but thy picture be Much pleasure then from thee much more must flow And soonest our best men with thee do go！ Rest of their bones and souls' delivery! Thou'rt slave to fate chance kings and desperate men And dost with poison war and sickness dwell And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well And better than thy stroke. Why swell'st thou then? One short sleep past we wake eternally And Death shall be no more: Death thou shalt die! When Crow cried his mother's ear Scorched to a stump. When he laughed she wept Blood her breasts her palms her brow all wept blood. He tried a step, then a step, and again a step - Every one scarred her face for ever. When he burst out in rage She fell back with an awful gash and a fearful cry. When he stopped she closed on him like a book On a bookmark, he had to get going. He jumped into the car the towrope Was around her neck he jumped out. He jumped into the plane but her body was jammed in the jet - There was a great row, the flight was cancelled. He jumped into the rocket and its trajectory Drilled clean through her heart he kept on And it was cosy in the rocket, he could not see much But he peered out through the portholes at Creation And saw the stars millions of miles away And saw the future and the universe Opening and opening And kept on and slept and at last Crashed on the moon awoke and crawled out Under his mother's buttocks. When God, disgusted with man, Turned towards heaven. And man, disgusted with God, Turned towards Eve, Things looked like falling apart. But Crow . . Crow Crow nailed them together, Nailing Heaven and earth together - So man cried, but with God's voice. And God bled, but with man's blood. Then heaven and earth creaked at the joint Which became gangrenous and stank - A horror beyond redemption. The agony did not diminish. Man could not be man nor God God. The agony Grew. Crow Grinned Crying: 'This is my Creation,' Flying the black flag of himself. He tried ignoring the sea But it was bigger than death, just as it was bigger than life. He tried talking to the sea But his brain shuttered and his eyes winced from it as from open flame. He tried sympathy for the sea But it shouldered him off - as a dead thing shoulders you off. He tried hating the sea But instantly felt like a scrutty dry rabbit-dropping on the windy cliff. He tried just being in the same world as the sea But his lungs were not deep enough And his cheery blood banged off it Like a water-drop off a hot stove. Finally He turned his back and he marched away from the sea As a crucified man cannot move. The flame-red moon, the harvest moon, Rolls along the hills, gently bouncing, A vast balloon, Till it takes off, and sinks upward To lie on the bottom of the sky, like a gold doubloon. The harvest moon has come, Booming softly through heaven, like a bassoon. And the earth replies all night, like a deep drum. So people can't sleep, So they go out where elms and oak trees keep A kneeling vigil, in a religious hush. The harvest moon has come! And all the moonlit cows and all the sheep Stare up at her petrified, while she swells Filling heaven, as if red hot, and sailing Closer and closer like the end of the world. Till the gold fields of stiff wheat Cry `We are ripe, reap us!' and the rivers Sweat from the melting hills. Crow Decided to try words. He imagined some words for the job, a lovely pack- Clear-eyed, resounding, well-trained, With strong teeth. You could not find a better bred lot. He pointed out the hare and away went the words Resounding. Crow was Crow without fail, but what is a hare? It converted itself to a concrete bunker. The words circled protesting, resounding. Crow turned the words into bombs-they blasted the bunker. The bits of bunker flew up-a flock of starlings. Crow turned the words into shotguns, they shot down the starlings. The falling starlings turned to a cloudburst. Crow turned the words into a reservoir, collecting the water. The water turned into an earthquake, swallowing the reservoir. The earthquake turned into a hare and leaped for the hill Having eaten Crow's words. Crow gazed after the bounding hare Speechless with admiration. Crow realized God loved him- Otherwise, he would have dropped dead. So that was proved. Crow reclined, marvelling, on his heart-beat. And he realized that God spoke Crow- Just existing was His revelation. But what Loved the stones and spoke stone? They seemed to exist too. And what spoke that strange silence After his clamour of caws faded? And what loved the shot-pellets That dribbled from those strung-up mummifying crows? What spoke the silence of lead? Crow realized there were two Gods- One of them much bigger than the other Loving his enemies And having all the weapons. So on the seventh day The serpent rested, God came up to him. "I've invented a new game," he said. The serpent stared in surprise At this interloper. But God said: "You see this apple?" I squeeze it and look-cider." The serpent had a good drink And curled up into a question mark. Adam drank and said: "Be my god." Eve drank and opened her legs And called to the cockeyed serpent And gave him a wild time. God ran and told Adam Who in drunken rage tried to hang himself in the orchard. The serpent tried to explain, crying "Stop" But drink was splitting his syllable. And Eve started screeching: "Rape! Rape!" And stamping on his head. Now whenever the snake appears she screeches "Here it comes again! Help! O Help!" Then Adam smashes a chair on his head, And God says: "I am well pleased" And everything goes to hell. "Well," said Crow, "What first?" God, exhausted with Creation, snored. "Which way?" said Crow, "Which way first?" God's shoulder was the mountain on which Crow sat. "Come," said Crow, "Let's discuss the situation." God lay, agape, a great carcass. Crow tore off a mouthful and swallowed. "Will this cipher divulge itself to digestion Under hearing beyond understanding?" (That was the first jest.) Yet, it's true, he suddenly felt much stronger. Crow, the hierophant, humped, impenetrable. Half-illumined. Speechless. (Appalled.) When Crow was white he decided the sun was too white. He decided it glared much too whitely. He decided to attack it and defeat it. He got his strength flush and in full glitter. He clawed and fluffed his rage up. He aimed his beak direct at the sun's centre. He laughed himself to the centre of himself And attacked. At his battle cry trees grew suddenly old, Shadows flattened. But the sun brightened- It brightened, and Crow returned charred black. He opened his mouth but what came out was charred black. "Up there," he managed, "Where white is black and black is white, I won." His illness was something could not vomit him up. Unwinding the world like a ball of wool Found the last end tied round his own finger. Decided to get death, but whatever Walked into his ambush Was always his own body. Where is this somebody who has me under? He dived, he journeyed, challenging, he climbed and with a glare Of hair on end finally met fear. His eyes sealed up with shock, refusing to see. With all his strength he struck. He felt the blow. Horrified, he fell. I sit in the top of the wood, my eyes closed. Inaction, no falsifying dream Between my hooked head and hooked feet: Or in sleep rehearse perfect kills and eat. The convenience of the high trees! The air's buoyancy and the sun's ray Are of advantage to me And the earth's face upward for my inspection. My feet are locked upon the rough bark. It took the whole of Creation To produce my foot, my each feather: Now I hold Creation in my foot Or fly up, and revolve it all slowly - I kill where I please because it is all mine. There is no sophistry in my body: My manners are tearing off heads - The allotment of death. For the one path of my flight is direct Through the bones of the living. No arguments assert my right: The sun is behind me. Nothing has changed since I began. My eye has permitted no change. I am going to keep things like this. QUEEN and huntress chaste and fair Now the sun is laid to sleep Seated in thy silver chair State in wonted manner keep: Hesperus entreats thy light Goddess excellently bright. Earth let not thy envious shade Dare itself to interpose Cynthia's shining orb was made Heaven to clear when day did close: Bless us then with wish┬d sight Goddess excellently bright. Lay thy bow of pearl apart And thy crystal-shining quiver Give unto the flying hart Space to breathe how short soever: Thou that mak'st a day of night！ Goddess excellently bright. DRINK to me only with thine eyes And I will pledge with mine Or leave a kiss but in the cup And I'll not look for wine. The thirst that from the soul doth rise Doth ask a drink divine But might I of Jove's nectar sup I would not change for thine. I sent thee late a rosy wreath Not so much honouring thee As giving it a hope that there It could not wither'd be But thou thereon didst only breathe And sent'st it back to me Since when it grows and smells I swear Not of itself but thee! STILL to be neat still to be drest As you were going to a feast Still to be powder'd still perfumed: Lady it is to be presumed Though art's hid causes are not found All is not sweet all is not sound. Give me a look give me a face That makes simplicity a grace Robes loosely flowing hair as free: Such sweet neglect more taketh me Than all th' adulteries of art They strike mine eyes but not my heart. FOLLOW a shadow it still flies you Seem to fly it it will pursue: So court a mistress she denies you Let her alone she will court you. Say are not women truly then Styled but the shadows of us men? At morn and even shades are longest At noon they are or short or none: So men at weakest they are strongest But grant us perfect they're not known. Say are not women truly then Styled but the shadows of us men? SEE the Chariot at hand here of Love, Wherein my Lady rideth! Each that draws is a swan or a dove, And well the car Love guideth. As she goes, all hearts do duty Unto her beauty And enamour'd do wish, so they might But enjoy such a sight, That they still were to run by her side, Through swords, through seas, whither she would ride. Do but look on her eyes, they do light All that Love's world compriseth! Do but look on her hair, it is bright As Love's star when it riseth! Do but mark, her forehead's smoother Than words that soothe her And from her arch'd brows such a grace Sheds itself through the face, As alone there triumphs to the life All the gain, all the good, of the elements' strife. Have you seen but a bright lily grow Before rude hands have touch'd it? Have you mark'd but the fall of the snow Before the soil hath smutch'd it? Have you felt the wool of beaver, Or swan's down ever? Or have smelt o' the bud o' the brier, Or the nard in the fire? Or have tasted the bag of the bee? O so white, O so soft, O so sweet is she! THOUGH beauty be the mark of praise And yours of whom I sing be such As not the world can praise too much Yet 'tis your Virtue now I raise. A virtue like allay so gone Throughout your form as though that move And draw and conquer all men's love This subjects you to love of one. Wherein you triumph yet！because 'Tis of your flesh and that you use The noblest freedom not to choose Against or faith or honour's laws. But who should less expect from you? In whom alone Love lives again: By whom he is restored to men And kept and bred and brought up true. His falling temples you have rear'd The wither'd garlands ta'en away His altars kept from that decay That envy wish'd and nature fear'd: And on them burn so chaste a flame With so much loyalty's expense As Love to acquit such excellence Is gone himself into your name. And you are he！the deity To whom all lovers are design'd That would their better objects find Among which faithful troop am I！ Who as an off'ring at your shrine Have sung this hymn and here entreat One spark of your diviner heat To light upon a love of mine. Which if it kindle not but scant Appear and that to shortest view Yet give me leave to adore in you What I in her am grieved to want! GLOSS: allay] alloy. FALSE world good night! since thou hast brought That hour upon my morn of age Henceforth I quit thee from my thought My part is ended on thy stage. Yes threaten do. Alas! I fear As little as I hope from thee: I know thou canst not show nor bear More hatred than thou hast to me. My tender first and simple years Thou didst abuse and then betray Since stir'd'st up jealousies and fears When all the causes were away. Then in a soil hast planted me Where breathe the basest of thy fools Where envious arts profess┬d be And pride and ignorance the schools Where nothing is examined weigh'd But as 'tis rumour'd so believed Where every freedom is betray'd And every goodness tax'd or grieved. But what we're born for we must bear: Our frail condition it is such That what to all may happen here If 't chance to me I must not grutch. Else I my state should much mistake To harbour a divided thought From all my kind！that for my sake There should a miracle be wrought. No I do know that I was born To age misfortune sickness grief: But I will bear these with that scorn As shall not need thy false relief. Nor for my peace will I go far As wanderers do that still do roam But make my strengths such as they are Here in my bosom and at home. HIGH-SPIRITED friend I send nor balms nor cor'sives to your wound: Your fate hath found A gentler and more agile hand to tend The cure of that which is but corporal And doubtful days which were named critical Have made their fairest flight And now are out of sight. Yet doth some wholesome physic for the mind Wrapp'd in this paper lie Which in the taking if you misapply You are unkind. Your covetous hand Happy in that fair honour it hath gain'd Must now be rein'd. True valour doth her own renown command In one full action nor have you now more To do than be a husband of that store. Think but how dear you bought This fame which you have caught: Such thoughts will make you more in love with truth. 'Tis wisdom and that high For men to use their fortune reverently Even in youth. Epitaphs: i WOULDST thou hear what Man can say In a little? Reader stay. Underneath this stone doth lie As much Beauty as could die: Which in life did harbour give To more Virtue than doth live. If at all she had a fault Leave it buried in this vault. One name was Elizabeth The other let it sleep with death: Fitter where it died to tell Than that it lived at all. Farewell. A child of Queen Elizabeth's Chapel Epitaphs: ii WEEP with me all you that read This little story And know for whom a tear you shed Death's self is sorry. 'Twas a child that so did thrive In grace and feature As Heaven and Nature seem'd to strive Which own'd the creature. Years he number'd scarce thirteen When Fates turn'd cruel Yet three fill'd zodiacs had he been The stage's jewel And did act (what now we moan) Old men so duly As sooth the Parcae thought him one He play'd so truly. So by error to his fate They all consented But viewing him since alas too late! They have repented And have sought to give new birth In baths to steep him But being so much too good for earth Heaven vows to keep him. to the Immortal Memory and Friendship of that noble pair Sir Lucius Cary and Sir H. Morison IT is not growing like a tree In bulk doth make man better be Or standing long an oak three hundred year To fall a log at last dry bald and sere: A lily of a day Is fairer far in May Although it fall and die that night It was the plant and flower of light. In small proportions we just beauties see And in short measures life may perfect be. Call noble Lucius then for wine And let thy looks with gladness shine: Accept this garland plant it on thy head And think！nay know！thy Morison 's not dead. He leap'd the present age Possest with holy rage To see that bright eternal Day Of which we Priests and Poets say Such truths as we expect for happy men And there he lives with memory！and Ben Jonson: who sung this of him ere he went Himself to rest Or tast a part of that full joy he meant To have exprest In this bright Asterism Where it were friendship's schism！ Were not his Lucius long with us to tarry！ To separate these twy Lights the Dioscuri And keep the one half from his Harry. But fate doth so alternate the design Whilst that in Heav'n this light on earth must shine. And shine as you exalted are! Two names of friendship but one star: Of hearts the union: and those not by chance Made or indenture or leased out to advance The profits for a time. No pleasures vain did chime Of rimes or riots at your feasts Orgies of drink or feign'd protests But simple love of greatness and of good That knits brave minds and manners more than blood. This made you first to know the Why You liked then after to apply That liking and approach so one the t'other Till either grew a portion of the other: Each styl┬d by his end The copy of his friend. You lived to be the great surnames And titles by which all made claims Unto the Virtue！nothing perfect done But as a CARY or a MORISON. And such the force the fair example had As they that saw The good and durst not practise it were glad That such a law Was left yet to mankind Where they might read and find FRIENDSHIP indeed was written not in words And with the heart not pen Of two so early men Whose lines her rules were and records: Who ere the first down bloom┬d on the chin Had sow'd these fruits and got the harvest in. FROM 'ENDYMION' O SORROW! Why dost borrow The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?！ To give maiden blushes To the white rose bushes? Or is it thy dewy hand the daisy tips? O Sorrow! Why dost borrow The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?！ To give the glow-worm light? Or, on a moonless night, To tinge, on siren shores, the salt sea-spry? O Sorrow! Why dost borrow The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?！ To give at evening pale Unto the nightingale, That thou mayst listen the cold dews among? O Sorrow! Why dost borrow Heart's lightness from the merriment of May?！ A lover would not tread A cowslip on the head, Though he should dance from eve till peep of day！ Nor any drooping flower Held sacred for thy bower, Wherever he may sport himself and play. To Sorrow I bade good morrow, And thought to leave her far away behind But cheerly, cheerly, She loves me dearly She is so constant to me, and so kind: I would deceive her And so leave her, But ah! she is so constant and so kind. Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side, I sat a-weeping: in the whole world wide There was no one to ask me why I wept,！ And so I kept Brimming the water-lily cups with tears Cold as my fears. Beneath my palm-trees, by the river side, I sat a-weeping: what enamour'd bride, Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds, But hides and shrouds Beneath dark palm-trees by a river side? And as I sat, over the light blue hills There came a noise of revellers: the rills Into the wide stream came of purple hue！ 'Twas Bacchus and his crew! The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills From kissing cymbals made a merry din！ 'Twas Bacchus and his kin! Like to a moving vintage down they came, Crown'd with green leaves, and faces all on flame All madly dancing through the pleasant valley, To scare thee, Melancholy! O then, O then, thou wast a simple name! And I forgot thee, as the berried holly By shepherds is forgotten, when in June Tall chestnuts keep away the sun and moon:！ I rush'd into the folly! Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood, Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood, With sidelong laughing And little rills of crimson wine imbrued His plump white arms and shoulders, enough white For Venus' pearly bite And near him rode Silenus on his ass, Pelted with flowers as he on did pass Tipsily quaffing. 'Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye, So many, and so many, and such glee? Why have ye left your bowers desolate, Your lutes, and gentler fate?'！ 'We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing, A-conquering! Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide, We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:！ Come hither, lady fair, and join┬d be To our wild minstrelsy!' 'Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye, So many, and so many, and such glee? Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?'！ 'For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms, And cold mushrooms For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth Great god of breathless cups and chirping mirth! Come hither, lady fair, and join┬d be To our mad minstrelsy!' Over wide streams and mountains great we went, And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent, Onward the tiger and the leopard pants, With Asian elephants: Onward these myriads！with song and dance, With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians' prance, Web-footed alligators, crocodiles, Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files, Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers' toil: With toying oars and silken sails they glide, Nor care for wind and tide. Mounted on panthers' furs and lions' manes, From rear to van they scour about the plains A three days' journey in a moment done And always, at the rising of the sun, About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn, On spleenful unicorn. I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown Before the vine-wreath crown! I saw parch'd Abyssinia rouse and sing To the silver cymbals' ring! I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce Old Tartary the fierce! The kings of Ind their jewel-sceptres vail, And from their treasures scatter pearl┬d hail Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans, And all his priesthood moans, Before young Bacchus' eye-wink turning pale. Into these regions came I, following him, Sick-hearted, weary！so I took a whim To stray away into these forests drear, Alone, without a peer: And I have told thee all thou mayest hear. Young Stranger! I've been a ranger In search of pleasure throughout every clime Alas! 'tis not for me! Bewitch'd I sure must be, To lose in grieving all my maiden prime. Come then, Sorrow, Sweetest Sorrow! Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast: I thought to leave thee, And deceive thee, But now of all the world I love thee best. There is not one, No, no, not one But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid Thou art her mother, And her brother, Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade. MY heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk, Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk: 'Tis not through envy of thy happy lot, But being too happy in thine happiness, That thou, light-wing┬d Dryad of the trees, In some melodious plot Of beechen green, and shadows numberless, Singest of summer in full-throated ease. O for a draught of vintage! that hath been Cool'd a long age in the deep-delv┬d earth, Tasting of Flora and the country-green, Dance, and Proven?al song, and sunburnt mirth! O for a beaker full of the warm South! Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene, With beaded bubbles winking at the brim, And purple-stain┬d mouth That I might drink, and leave the world unseen, And with thee fade away into the forest dim: Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget What thou among the leaves hast never known, The weariness, the fever, and the fret Here, where men sit and hear each other groan Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last grey hairs, Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies Where but to think is to be full of sorrow And leaden-eyed despairs Where beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes, Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow. Away! away! for I will fly to thee, Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards, But on the viewless wings of Poesy, Though the dull brain perplexes and retards: Already with thee! tender is the night, And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne, Cluster'd around by all her starry Fays But here there is no light, Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways. I cannot see what flowers are at my feet, Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs, But, in embalm┬d darkness, guess each sweet Wherewith the seasonable month endows The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine Fast-fading violets cover'd up in leaves And mid-May's eldest child, The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine, The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves. Darkling I listen and, for many a time I have been half in love with easeful Death, Call'd him soft names in many a mus┬d rhyme, To take into the air my quiet breath Now more than ever seems it rich to die, To cease upon the midnight with no pain, While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad In such an ecstasy! Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain！ To thy high requiem become a sod. Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird! No hungry generations tread thee down The voice I hear this passing night was heard In ancient days by emperor and clown: Perhaps the self-same song that found a path Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home, She stood in tears amid the alien corn The same that ofttimes hath Charm'd magic casements, opening on the foam Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn. Forlorn! the very word is like a bell To toll me back from thee to my sole self! Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well As she is famed to do, deceiving elf. Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades Past the near meadows, over the still stream, Up the hill-side and now 'tis buried deep In the next valley-glades: Was it a vision, or a waking dream? Fled is that music:！do I wake or sleep? THOU still unravish'd bride of quietness Thou foster-child of Silence and slow Time Sylvan historian who canst thus express A flowery tale more sweetly than our rhyme: What leaf-fringed legend haunts about thy shape Of deities or mortals or of both In Tempe or the dales of Arcady? What men or gods are these? What maidens loth? What mad pursuit? What struggle to escape? What pipes and timbrels? What wild ecstasy? Heard melodies are sweet but those unheard Are sweeter therefore ye soft pipes play on Not to the sensual ear but more endear'd Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone: Fair youth beneath the trees thou canst not leave Thy song nor ever can those trees be bare Bold Lover never never canst thou kiss Though winning near the goal！yet do not grieve She cannot fade though thou hast not thy bliss For ever wilt thou love and she be fair! Ah happy happy boughs! that cannot shed Your leaves nor ever bid the Spring adieu And happy melodist unweari┬d For ever piping songs for ever new More happy love! more happy happy love! For ever warm and still to be enjoy'd For ever panting and for ever young All breathing human passion far above That leaves a heart high-sorrowful and cloy'd A burning forehead and a parching tongue. Who are these coming to the sacrifice? To what green altar O mysterious priest Lead'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies And all her silken flanks with garlands drest? What little town by river or sea-shore Or mountain-built with peaceful citadel Is emptied of its folk this pious morn? And little town thy streets for evermore Will silent be and not a soul to tell Why thou art desolate can e'er return. O Attic shape! fair attitude! with brede Of marble men and maidens overwrought With forest branches and the trodden weed Thou silent form! dost tease us out of thought As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral! When old age shall this generation waste Thou shalt remain in midst of other woe Than ours a friend to man to whom thou say'st 'Beauty is truth truth beauty ！that is all Ye know on earth and all ye need to know.' O GODDESS! hear these tuneless numbers, wrung By sweet enforcement and remembrance dear, And pardon that thy secrets should be sung Even into thine own soft-conch┬d ear: Surely I dream'd to-day, or did I see The wing┬d Psyche with awaken'd eyes? I wander'd in a forest thoughtlessly, And, on the sudden, fainting with surprise, Saw two fair creatures, couch┬d side by side In deepest grass, beneath the whisp'ring roof Of leaves and trembled blossoms, where there ran A brooklet, scarce espied: 'Mid hush'd, cool-rooted flowers, fragrant-eyed, Blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian They lay calm-breathing on the bedded grass Their arms embrac┬d, and their pinions too Their lips touch'd not, but had not bade adieu, As if disjoin┬d by soft-handed slumber, And ready still past kisses to outnumber At tender eye-dawn of aurorean love: The wing┬d boy I knew But who wast thou, O happy, happy dove? His Psyche true! O latest-born and loveliest vision far Of all Olympus' faded hierarchy! Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-region'd star, Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none, Nor altar heap'd with flowers Nor Virgin-choir to make delicious moan Upon the midnight hours No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet From chain-swung censer teeming No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming. O brightest! though too late for antique vows, Too, too late for the fond believing lyre, When holy were the haunted forest boughs, Holy the air, the water, and the fire Yet even in these days so far retired From happy pieties, thy lucent fans, Fluttering among the faint Olympians, I see, and sing, by my own eyes inspired. So let me be thy choir, and make a moan Upon the midnight hours Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet From swing┬d censer teeming: Thy shrine, thy grove, thy oracle, thy heat Of pale-mouth'd prophet dreaming. Yes, I will be thy priest, and build a fane In some untrodden region of my mind, Where branch┬d thoughts, new grown with pleasant pain, Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind: Far, far around shall those dark-cluster'd trees Fledge the wild-ridg┬d mountains steep by steep And there by zephyrs, streams, and birds, and bees, The moss-lain Dryads shall be lull'd to sleep And in the midst of this wide quietness A rosy sanctuary will I dress With the wreath'd trellis of a working brain, With buds, and bells, and stars without a name, With all the gardener Fancy e'er could feign, Who breeding flowers, will never breed the same And there shall be for thee all soft delight That shadowy thought can win, A bright torch, and a casement ope at night, To let the warm Love in! SEASON of mists and mellow fruitfulness! Close bosom-friend of the maturing sun Conspiring with him how to load and bless With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run To bend with apples the moss'd cottage-trees And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core To swell the gourd and plump the hazel shells With a sweet kernel to set budding more And still more later flowers for the bees Until they think warm days will never cease For Summer has o'er-brimm'd their clammy cells. Who hath not seen thee oft amid thy store? Sometimes whoever seeks abroad may find Thee sitting careless on a granary floor Thy hair soft-lifted by the winnowing wind Or on a half-reap'd furrow sound asleep Drowsed with the fume of poppies while thy hook Spares the next swath and all its twin┬d flowers And sometimes like a gleaner thou dost keep Steady thy laden head across a brook Or by a cider-press with patient look Thou watchest the last oozings hours by hours. Where are the songs of Spring? Ay where are they? Think not of them thou hast thy music too ！ While barr┬d clouds bloom the soft-dying day And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn Among the river sallows borne aloft Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn Hedge-crickets sing and now with treble soft The redbreast whistles from a garden-croft And gathering swallows twitter in the skies. NO no! go not to Lethe neither twist Wolf's-bane tight-rooted for its poisonous wine Nor suffer thy pale forehead to be kist By nightshade ruby grape of Proserpine Make not your rosary of yew-berries Nor let the beetle nor the death-moth be Your mournful Psyche nor the downy owl A partner in your sorrow's mysteries For shade to shade will come too drowsily And drown the wakeful anguish of the soul. But when the melancholy fit shall fall Sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud That fosters the droop-headed flowers all And hides the green hill in an April shroud Then glut thy sorrow on a morning rose Or on the rainbow of the salt sand-wave Or on the wealth of glob┬d peonies Or if thy mistress some rich anger shows Emprison her soft hand and let her rave And feed deep deep upon her peerless eyes. She dwells with Beauty！Beauty that must die And Joy whose hand is ever at his lips Bidding adieu and aching Pleasure nigh Turning to poison while the bee-mouth sips: Ay in the very temple of Delight Veil'd Melancholy has her sovran shrine Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue Can burst Joy's grape against his palate fine His soul shall taste the sadness of her might And be among her cloudy trophies hung. (Written on May-Day ) MOTHER of Hermes! and still youthful Maia! May I sing to thee As thou wast hymn┬d on the shores of Bai?? Or may I woo thee In earlier Sicilian? or thy smiles Seek as they once were sought in Grecian isles By bards who died content on pleasant sward Leaving great verse unto a little clan? O give me their old vigour! and unheard Save of the quiet primrose and the span Of heaven and few ears Rounded by thee my song should die away Content as theirs Rich in the simple worship of a day. Written on the Blank Page before Beaumont and Fletcher's Tragi-Comedy 'The Fair Maid of the Inn' BARDS of Passion and of Mirth Ye have left your souls on earth! Have ye souls in heaven too Doubled-lived in regions new? Yes and those of heaven commune With the spheres of sun and moon With the noise of fountains wondrous And the parle of voices thund'rous With the whisper of heaven's trees And one another in soft ease Seated on Elysian lawns Browsed by none but Dian's fawns Underneath large blue-bells tented Where the daisies are rose-scented And the rose herself has got Perfume which on earth is not Where the nightingale doth sing Not a senseless tranc┬d thing But divine melodious truth Philosophic numbers smooth Tales and golden histories Of heaven and its mysteries. Thus ye live on high and then On the earth ye live again And the souls ye left behind you Teach us here the way to find you Where your other souls are joying Never slumber'd never cloying. Here your earth-born souls still speak To mortals of their little week Of their sorrows and delights Of their passions and their spites Of their glory and their shame What doth strengthen and what maim. Thus ye teach us every day Wisdom though fled far away. Bards of Passion and of Mirth Ye have left your souls on earth! Ye have souls in heaven too Double-lived in regions new! EVER let the Fancy roam, Pleasure never is at home: At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth, Like to bubbles when rain pelteth Then let wing┬d Fancy wander Through the thought still spread beyond her: Open wide the mind's cage-door, She'll dart forth, and cloudward soar. O sweet Fancy! let her loose Summer's joys are spoilt by use, And the enjoying of the Spring Fades as does its blossoming Autumn's red-lipp'd fruitage too, Blushing through the mist and dew, Cloys with tasting: What do then? Sit thee by the ingle, when The sear faggot blazes bright, Spirit of a winter's night When the soundless earth is muffled, And the cak┬d snow is shuffled From the ploughboy's heavy shoon When the Night doth meet the Noon In a dark conspiracy To banish Even from her sky. Sit thee there, and send abroad, With a mind self-overawed, Fancy, high-commission'd:！send her! She has vassals to attend her: She will bring, in spite of frost, Beauties that the earth hath lost She will bring thee, all together, All delights of summer weather All the buds and bells of May, From dewy sward or thorny spray All the heap┬d Autumn's wealth, With a still, mysterious stealth: She will mix these pleasures up Like three fit wines in a cup, And thou shalt quaff it:！thou shalt hear Distant harvest-carols clear Rustle of the reap┬d corn Sweet birds antheming the morn: And, in the same moment！hark! 'Tis the early April lark, Or the rooks, with busy caw, Foraging for sticks and straw. Thou shalt, at one glance, behold The daisy and the marigold White-plumed lilies, and the first Hedge-grown primrose that hath burst Shaded hyacinth, alway Sapphire queen of the mid-May And every leaf, and every flower Pearl┬d with the self-same shower. Thou shalt see the fieldmouse peep Meagre from its cell┬d sleep And the snake all winter-thin Cast on sunny bank its skin Freckled nest-eggs thou shalt see Hatching in the hawthorn-tree, When the hen-bird's wing doth rest Quiet on her mossy nest Then the hurry and alarm When the beehive casts its swarm Acorns ripe down-pattering While the autumn breezes sing. O sweet Fancy! let her loose Every thing is spoilt by use: Where 's the cheek that doth not fade, Too much gazed at? Where 's the maid Whose lip mature is ever new? Where 's the eye, however blue, Doth not weary? Where 's the face One would meet in every place? Where 's the voice, however soft, One would hear so very oft? At a touch sweet Pleasure melteth Like to bubbles when rain pelteth. Let, then, wing┬d Fancy find Thee a mistress to thy mind: Dulcet-eyed as Ceres' daughter, Ere the God of Torment taught her How to frown and how to chide With a waist and with a side White as Hebe's, when her zone Slipt its golden clasp, and down Fell her kirtle to her feet, While she held the goblet sweet, And Jove grew languid.！Break the mesh Of the Fancy's silken leash Quickly break her prison-string, And such joys as these she'll bring.！ Let the wing┬d Fancy roam, Pleasure never is at home. IN a drear-nighted December Too happy happy tree Thy branches ne'er remember Their green felicity: The north cannot undo them With a sleety whistle through them Nor frozen thawings glue them From budding at the prime. In a drear-nighted December Too happy happy brook Thy bubblings ne'er remember Apollo's summer look But with a sweet forgetting They stay their crystal fretting Never never petting About the frozen time. Ah! would 'twere so with many A gentle girl and boy! But were there ever any Writhed not at pass┬d joy? To know the change and feel it When there is none to heal it Nor numb┬d sense to steal it Was never said in rhyme. 'O WHAT can ail thee knight-at-arms Alone and palely loitering? The sedge is wither'd from the lake And no birds sing. 'O what can ail thee knight-at-arms So haggard and so woe-begone? The squirrel's granary is full And the harvest 's done. 'I see a lily on thy brow With anguish moist and fever dew And on thy cheeks a fading rose Fast withereth too.' 'I met a lady in the meads Full beautiful！a faery's child Her hair was long her foot was light And her eyes were wild. 'I made a garland for her head And bracelets too and fragrant zone She look'd at me as she did love And made sweet moan. 'I set her on my pacing steed And nothing else saw all day long For sideways would she lean and sing A faery's song. 'She found me roots of relish sweet And honey wild and manna dew And sure in language strange she said I love thee true! 'She took me to her elfin grot And there she wept and sigh'd fill sore And there I shut her wild wild eyes With kisses four. 'And there she lull┬d me asleep And there I dream'd！Ah! woe betide! The latest dream I ever dream'd On the cold hill's side. 'I saw pale kings and princes too Pale warriors death-pale were they all They cried！"La belle Dame sans Merci Hath thee in thrall!" 'I saw their starved lips in the gloam With horrid warning gap┬d wide And I awoke and found me here On the cold hill's side. 'And this is why I sojourn here Alone and palely loitering Though the sedge is wither'd from the lake And no birds sing.' MUCH have I travell'd in the realms of gold And many goodly states and kingdoms seen Round many western islands have I been Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold. Oft of one wide expanse had I been told That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne: Yet did I never breathe its pure serene Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold: Then felt I like some watcher of the skies When a new planet swims into his ken Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes He stared at the Pacific！and all his men Look'd at each other with a wild surmise！ Silent upon a peak in Darien. WHEN I have fears that I may cease to be Before my pen has glean'd my teeming brain Before high pil&ampgraved books in charact'ry Hold like rich garners the full-ripen'd grain When I behold upon the night's starr'd face Huge cloudy symbols of a high romance And feel that I may never live to trace Their shadows with the magic hand of chance And when I feel fair creature of an hour! That I shall never look upon thee more Never have relish in the faery power Of unreflecting love！then on the shore Of the wide world I stand alone and think Till Love and Fame to nothingness do sink. O SOFT embalmer of the still midnight! Shutting with careful fingers and benign Our gloom-pleased eyes embower'd from the light Enshaded in forgetfulness divine O soothest Sleep! if so it please thee close In midst of this thine hymn my willing eyes Or wait the amen ere thy poppy throws Around my bed its lulling charities Then save me or the pass┬d day will shine Upon my pillow breeding many woes Save me from curious conscience that still lords Its strength for darkness burrowing like a mole Turn the key deftly in the oil┬d wards And seal the hush┬d casket of my soul. BRIGHT Star! would I were steadfast as thou art！ Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night And watching with eternal lids apart Like Nature's patient sleepless Eremite The moving waters at their priest-like task Of pure ablution round earth's human shores Or gazing on the new soft-fallen mask Of snow upon the mountains and the moors！ No！yet still steadfast still unchangeable Pillow'd upon my fair love's ripening breast To feel for ever its soft fall and swell Awake for ever in a sweet unrest Still still to hear her tender-taken breath And so live ever！or else swoon to death. Once i am sure there's nothing going on I step inside letting the door thud shut. Another church: matting seats and stone and little books sprawlings of flowers cut For Sunday brownish now some brass and stuff Up at the holy end the small neat organ And a tense musty unignorable silence Brewed God knows how long. Hatless I take off My cylce-clips in awkward revrence Move forward run my hand around the font. From where i stand the roof looks almost new-- Cleaned or restored? someone would know: I don't. Mounting the lectern I peruse a few hectoring large-scale verses and pronouce Here endeth much more loudly than I'd meant The echoes snigger briefly. Back at the door I sign the book donate an Irish sixpence Reflect the place was not worth stopping for. Yet stop I did: in fact I often do And always end much at a loss like this Wondering what to look for wondering too When churches fall completely out of use What we shall turn them into if we shall keep A few cathedrals chronically on show Their parchment plate and pyx in locked cases And let the rest rent-free to rain and sheep. Shall we avoid them as unlucky places? Or after dark will dubious women come To make their children touvh a particular stone Pick simples for a cancer or on some Advised night see walking a dead one? Power of some sort or other will go on In games in riddles seemingly at random But superstition like belief must die And what remains when disbelief has gone? Grass weedy pavement brambles butress sky. A shape less recognisable each week A purpose more obscure. I wonder who Will be the last the very last to seek This place for whta it was one of the crew That tap and jot and know what rood-lofts were? Some ruin-bibber randy for antique Or Christmas-addict counting on a whiff Of grown-and-bands and organ-pipes and myrrh? Or will he be my representative Bored uninformed knowing the ghostly silt Dispersed yet tending to this cross of ground Through suburb scrub because it held unspilt So long and equably what since is found Only in separation--marriage and birth And death and thoughts of these--for which was built This special shell? For though I've no idea What this accoutred frowsty barn is worth It pleases me to stand in silence here A serious house on serious earth it is In whose blent air all our compulsions meet Are recognisd and robed as destinies. And that much never can be obsolete Since someone will forever be surprising A hunger in himself to be more serious And gravitating with it to this ground Which he once heard was proper to grow wise in If only that so many dead lie round. Those long uneven lines Standing as patiently As if they were stretched outside The Oval or Villa Park The crowns of hats the sun On moustached archaic faces Grinning as if it were all An August bank Holiday lark And the shut shops the bleached Established names on the sunblinds The farthings and sovereigns Adn dark-clothed children at play Called after kings and queens The tin advertisements For cocoa and twist and the pubs Wide open all day And the countryside ont caring: The place-names all hazed over With flowering grasses and fields Shadowing Domesday lines Under wheat's restless silence The differently-dressed servants With tiny rooms in huge houses The dust behind limousines Never such innocence Never before or since As changed itself to past Without a word--the men Leaving the gardens tidy The thousands of marriages Lasting a littlewhile longer: Never such innocence again. Talking in bed ought ot be easiest Lying together there goes back so far An emblem of two people being honest. Yet more and more time passes silently. Outside the wind's incomplete unrest builds and disperses clouds about the sky. And dark towns heap up on the horizon. None of this cares for us. Nothing shows why At this unique distance from isolation It becomes still more difficult to find Words at once true and kind Or ont untrue and not unkind. Closed like confessionals, they thread Loud noons of cities, giving back None of the glances they absorb. Light glossy grey, arms on a plaque, They come to rest at any kerb: All streets in time are visited. Then children strewn on steps or road, Or women coming from the shops Past smells of different dinners, see A wild white face that overtops Red stretcher-blankets momently As it is carried in and stowed, And sense the solving emptiness That lies just under all we do, And for a second get it whole, So permanent and blank and true. The fastened doors recede. Poor soul, They whisper at their own distress For borne away in deadened air May go the sudden shut of loss Round something nearly at an end, And what cohered in it across The years, the unique random blend Of families and fashions, there At last begin to loosen. Far From the exchange of love to lie Unreachable insided a room The trafic parts to let go by Brings closer what is left to come, And dulls to distance all we are. when I see a couple of kids And guess he's fucking her and she's taking pills or wearing a diaphragm I know this is paradise Everyone old has dreamed of all their lives-- Bonds and gestures pushed to one side Like an outdated combine harvester And everyone young going down the long slide To happiness endlessly. I wonder if Anyone looked at me forty years back An thought That'll be the life No God any more or sweating in the dark About hell and that or having to hide What you think of the priest. He And his lot will all go down the long side Like free bloody birds. And immediately Rather than words comes the thought of high windows: The sun-comprehending glass And beyond it the deep blue air that shows Nothing and is nowhere and is endless. On the day of the explosion Shadows pointed towards the pithead: In thesun the slagheap slept. Down the lane came men in pitboots Coughing oath-edged talk and pipe-smoke Shouldering off the freshened silence. One chased after rabbits lost them Came back with a nest of lark's eggs Showed them lodged them in the grasses. SO they passed in beards and moleskins Fathers brothers nicknames laughter Through the tall gates standing open. At noon there came a tremor cows Stopped chewing for a second sun Scarfed as in a heat-haze dimmed. The dead go on before us they Are sitting in God's house in comfort We shall see them face to face-- plian as lettering in the chapels It was said and for a second Wives saw men of the explosion Larger than in life they managed-- Gold as on a coin or walking Somehow from the sun towards them One showing the eggs unbroken. Lest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heav'ns joy, Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Vers, Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ Dead things with inbreath'd sense able to pierce, And to our high-rais'd phantasie present, That undisturb┬d Song of pure content, Ay sung before the saphire-colour'd throne To him that sits theron With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily, Where the bright Seraphim in burning row Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow, And the Cherubick host in thousand quires Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires, With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms, Hymns devout and holy Psalms Singing everlastingly That we on Earth with undiscording voice May rightly answer that melodious noise As once we did, till disproportion'd sin Jarr'd against nature chime, and with harsh din Broke the fair musick that all creatures made To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway'd In perfect Diapason, whilst they stood In first obedience, and their state of good. O may we soon again renew that Song, And keep in tune with Heav'n, till God ere long To his celestial consort us unite, To live with him, and sing in endles morn of light. from Paradise Lost Hus talking, hand in hand alone they passed On to their blissful bower. It was a place Chosen by the sov'reign Planter, when he framed All things to Man's delightful use the roof Of thickest covert was inwoven shade, Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew Of firm and fragrant leaf on either side Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub, Fenced up the verdant wall each beauteous flower, Iris all hues, roses, and jessamine, Rear'd high their flourished heads between, and wrought Mosaic under foot the violet, Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay Broidered the ground, more coloured than the stone Of costliest emblem: Other creature here, Beast, bird, insect, or worm, durst enter none Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor nymph, Nor Faunus haunted. Here, in close recess, With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs, Espous┬d Eve decked first her nuptial bed And heavenly quires the hymenean sung, What day the genial Angel to our sire Brought her, in naked beauty more adorned, More lovely than Pandora, whom the Gods Endowed with all their gifts, and, O! too like In sad event, when to the unwiser son Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged On him who had stole Jove's authentic fire. Thus at their shady lodge arrived, both stood, Both turned, and under open sky adored The God that made both sky, air, earth and heaven Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe, And starry pole: "Thou also madest the night, Maker Omnipotent and thou the day, Which we in our appointed work employed, Have finished, happy in our mutual help And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss Ordained by thee and this delicious place, For us too large, where thy abundance wants Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. But thou hast promised from us two a race To fill the earth, who shall with us extol They goodness infinite, both when we wake And when we seek, as now, the gift of sleep." This said unanimous, and other rites Observing none, but adoration pure Which God likes best, into their inmost bower Handed they went and eased the putting off Those troublesome disguises which we wear, Straight side by side were laid nor turned, I ween, Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites Mysterious of connubial love refused: Whatever hypocrites austerely talk Of purity, and place, and innocence, Defaming as impure what God declares Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all. Our Maker bids increase who bids abstain But our destroyer, foe to God and Man? Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source Of human offspring, sole propriety In Paradise, of all things common else! By thee adult'rous love was driven from men Among the bestial herds to range by thee, Founded in reason, loyal, just and pure, Relations dear, and all the charities Of father, son, and brother, first were known. Far be it that I should write thee sin or blame, Or think the unbefitting holiest place Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets, Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced, Present or past, as saints and patriarchs used! Here love his golden shafts employs, here lights His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings, Reigns here and revels not in the bought smile Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared, Casual fruition: nor in court amours Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball, Or serenade, which the starved lover sings To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. These lulled by nightingales embracing slept, And on their naked limbs the flow'ry roof Showered roses, which the morn repaired. Sleep on, Blest pair! and, O! yet happiest if ye seek No happier state, and know to know no more! Ail holy light, ofspring of Heav'n first-born, Or of th' Eternal Coeternal beam May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light, And never but in unapproach┬d light Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee, Bright effluence of bright essence increate. Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream, Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun, Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice Of God, as with a Mantle didst invest The rising world of waters dark and deep, Won from the void and formless infinite. Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing, Escap't the Stygian Pool, though long detain'd In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight Through utter and through middle darkness borne With other notes then to th' Orphean Lyre I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night, Taught by the heav'nly Muse to venture down The dark descent, and up to reascend, Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe, And feel thy sovran vital Lamp but thou Revisit'st not these eyes, that rowle in vain To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn So thick a drop serene hath quencht thir Orbs, Or dim suffusion veild. Yet not the more Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt Cleer Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill, Smit with the love of sacred song but chief Thee Sion and the flowrie Brooks beneath That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow, Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget Those other two equal'd with me in Fate, So were I equal'd with them in renown. Blind Thamyris and blind Monides, And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old. Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move Harmonious numbers as the wakeful Bird Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year Seasons return, but not to me returns Day, or the sweet approach of Ev'n or Morn, Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose, Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the chearful waies of men Cut off, and for the Book of knowledge fair Presented with a Universal blanc Of Natures works to mee expung'd and ras'd, And wisdome at one entrance quite shut out. So much the rather thou Celestial light Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers Irradiate, there plant eyes, all mist from thence Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell Of things invisible to mortal sight. Hen I consider how my light is spent Ere half my days in this dark world and wide, And that one talent which is death to hide, Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent To serve therewith my Maker, and present My true account, lest He returning chide, 'Doth God exact day labor, light denied?' I fondly ask. But Patience to prevent That murmur soon replies, 'God doth not need Either man's work or his own gifts. Who best Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best. His state Is kingly: thousands at his bidding speed, And post o'er land and ocean without rest They also serve who only stand and wait.' Ethought I saw my late espous┬d Saint Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave, Whom Joves great Son to her glad Husband gave, Rescu'd from death by force though pale and faint, Mine as whom washt from spot of child-bed taint, Purification in the old Law did save, And such, as yet once more I trust to have Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint, Came vested all in white, pure as her mind: Her face was vail'd, yet to my fancied sight, Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd So clear, as in no face with more delight. But O as to embrace me she enclin'd I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night. Ow soon hath Time, the subtle thief of youth, Stolen on his wing my three-and-twentieth year! My hasting days fly on with full career, But my late spring no bud or blossow shew'th. Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth That I to manhood am arrived so near And inward ripeness doth much less appear, That some more timely-happy spirits endu'th. Yet, be it less or more, or soon or slow, It shall be still in strictest measure even To that same lot, however mean or high, Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heaven. All is, if I have grace to use it so, As ever in my great Task-Master's eye. Venge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints, whose bones Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old, When all our fathers worshipped stocks and stones, Forget not: in thy book record their groans Who were thy sheep, and in their ancient fold Slain by the bloody Piedmontese, that rolled Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans The vales redoubled to the hills, and they To heaven. Their martyred blood and ashes sow O'er all the Italian fields, where still doth sway The triple Tyrant that from these may grow A hundred fold, who, having learnt thy way, Early may fly the Babylonian woe. Ly envious Time, till thou run out thy race, Call on the lazy leaden-stepping hours, Whose speed is but the heavy Plummets pace And glut thy self with what thy womb devours, Which is no more then what is false and vain, And meerly mortal dross So little is our loss, So little is thy gain. For when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd, And last of all, thy greedy self consum'd, Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss With an individual kiss And Joy shall overtake us as a flood, When every thing that is sincerely good And perfectly divine, With Truth, and Peace, and Love shall ever shine About the supreme Throne Of him, t'whose happy-making sight alone, When once our heav'nly-guided soul shall clime, Then all this Earthy grosnes quit, Attir'd with Stars, we shall for ever sit, Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time. Aughter to that good Earl, once President Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury, Who liv'd in both, unstain'd with gold or fee, And left them both, more in himself content, Till the sad breaking of that Parlament Broke him, as that dishonest victory At Chron┬a, fatal to liberty Kil'd with report that Old man eloquent, Though later born, then to have known the dayes Wherin your Father flourisht, yet by you Madam, me thinks I see him living yet So well your words his noble vertues praise, That all both judge you to relate them true, And to possess them, Honour'd Margaret. I've never ceased to curse the day I signed A seven years' bargain for the Golden Fleece. 'Twas a bad deal all round and dear enough It cost me what with my daft management And the mean folk as owed and never paid me And backing losers and the local bucks Egging me on with whiskys while I bragged The man I was when huntsman to the Squire. I'd have been prosperous if I'd took a farm Of fifty acres drove my gig and haggled At Monday markets now I've squandered all My savings nigh three hundred pound I got As testimonial when I'd grown too stiff And slow to press a beaten fox. The Fleece! 'Twas the damned Fleece that wore my Emily out The wife of thirty years who served me well (Not like this beldam clattering in the kitchen That never trims a lamp nor sweeps the floor And brings me greasy soup in a foul crock.) Blast the old harridan! What's fetched her now Leaving me in the dark and short of fire? And where's my pipe? 'Tis lucky I've a turn For thinking and remembering all that's past. And now's my hour before I hobble to bed To set the works a-wheezing wind the clock That keeps the time of life with feeble tick Behind my bleared old face that stares and wonders. . . . . It's queer how in the dark comes back to mind Some morning of September. We've been digging In a steep sandy warren riddled with holes And I've just pulled the terrier out and left A sharp-nosed cub-face blinking there and snapping Then in a moment seen him mobbed and torn To strips in the baying hurly of the pack. I picture it so clear: the dusty sunshine On bracken and the men with spades that wipe Red faces: one tilts up a mug of ale. And having stopped to clean my gory hands I whistle the jostling beauties out of the wood. I'm but a daft old fool! I often wish The Squire were back again！ah! he was a man! They don't breed men like him these days he'd come For sure and sit and talk and suck his briar Till the old wife brings up a dish of tea. Ay those were days when I was serving Squire! I never knowed such sport as ' The winter afore the one that snowed us silly. . . . . Once in a way the parson will drop in And read a bit o' the Bible if I'm bad And pray the Lord to make my spirit whole In faith: he leaves some 'baccy on the shelf And wonders I don't keep a dog to cheer me Because he knows I'm mortal fond of dogs! I ask you what's a gent like that to me As wouldn't know Elijah if I saw him Nor have the wit to keep him on the talk? 'Tis kind of parson to be troubling still With such as me but he's a town-bred chap Full of his college notions and Christmas hymns. Religion beats me. I'm amazed at folk Drinking the gospels in and never scratching Their heads for questions. When I was a lad I learned a bit from mother and never thought To educate myself for prayers and psalms. But now I'm old and bald and serious-minded With days to sit and ponder. I'd no chance When young and gay to get the hang of all This Hell and Heaven: and when the clergy hoick And holloa from their pulpits I'm asleep However hard I listen and when they pray It seems we're all like children sucking sweets In school and wondering whether master sees. I used to dream of Hell when I was first Promoted to a huntsman's job and scent Was rotten and all the foxes disappeared And hounds were short of blood and officers From barracks over-rode 'em all day long On weedy whistling nags that knocked a hole In every fence good sportsmen to a man And brigadiers by now but dreadful hard On a young huntsman keen to show some sport. Ay Hell was thick with captains and I rode The lumbering brute that's beat in half a mile And blunders into every blind old ditch. Hell was the coldest scenting land I've known And both my whips were always lost and hounds Would never get their heads down and a man On a great yawing chestnut trying to cast 'em While I was in a corner pounded by The ugliest hog-backed stile you've clapped your eyes on. There was an iron-spiked fence round all the coverts And civil-spoken keepers I couldn't trust And the main earth unstopp'd. The fox I found Was always a three-legged 'un from a bag Who reeked of aniseed and wouldn't run. The farmers were all ploughing their old pasture And bellowing at me when I rode their beans To cast for beaten fox or galloped on With hounds to a lucky view. I'd lost my voice Although I shouted fit to burst my guts And couldn't blow my horn. And when I woke Emily snored and barn-cocks started crowing And morn was at the window and I was glad To be alive because I heard the cry Of hounds like church-bells chiming on a Sunday. Ay that's the song I'd wish to hear in Heaven! The cry of hounds was Heaven for me: I know Parson would call me crazed and wrong to say it But where's the use of life and being glad If God's not in your gladness? I've no brains For book-learned studies but I've heard men say There's much in print that clergy have to wink at: Though many I've met were jolly chaps and rode To hounds and walked me puppies and could pick Good legs and loins and necks and shoulders ay And feet！'twas necks and feet I looked at first. Some hounds I've known were wise as half your saints And better hunters. That old dog of the Duke's Harlequin what a dog he was to draw! And what a note he had and what a nose When foxes ran down wind and scent was catchy! And that light lemon bitch of the Squire's old Dorcas！ She were a marvellous hunter were old Dorcas! Ay oft I've thought ｀If there were hounds in Heaven With God as master taking no subscription And all His bless┬d country farmed by tenants And a straight-necked old fox in every gorse!' But when I came to work it out I found There'd be too many huntsmen wanting places Though some I've known might get a job with Nick! . . . . I've come to think of God as something like The figure of a man the old Duke was When I was turning hounds to Nimrod King Before his Grace was took so bad with gout And had to quit the saddle. Tall and spare Clean-shaved and grey with shrewd kind eyes that twinkled And easy walk who when he gave good words Gave them whole-hearted and would never blame Without just cause. Lord God might be like that Sitting alone in a great room of books Some evening after hunting. Now I'm tired With hearkening to the tick-tack on the shelf And pondering makes me doubtful. Riding home On a moonless night of cloud that feels like frost Though stars are hidden (hold your feet up horse!) And thinking what a task I had to draw A pack with all those lame 'uns and the lot Wanting a rest from all this open weather That's what I'm doing now. And likely too The frost'll be a long 'un and the night One sleep. The parsons say we'll wake to find A country blinding-white with dazzle of snow. The naked stars make men feel lonely wheeling And glinting on the puddles in the road. And then you listen to the wind and wonder If folk are quite such bucks as they appear When dressed by London tailors looking down Their boots at covert side and thinking big. . . . . This world's a funny place to live in. Soon I'll need to change my country but I know 'Tis little enough I've understood my life And a power of sights I've missed and foreign marvels. I used to feel it riding on spring days In meadows pied with sun and chasing clouds And half forget how I was there to catch The foxes lose the angry eager feeling A huntsman ought to have that's out for blood And means his hounds to get it! Now I know It's God that speaks to us when we're bewitched Smelling the hay in June and smiling quiet Or when there's been a spell of summer drought Lying awake and listening to the rain. . . . . I'd like to be the simpleton I was In the old days when I was whipping-in To a little harrier-pack in Worcestershire And loved a dairymaid but never knew it Until she'd wed another. So I've loved My life and when the good years are gone down Discover what I've lost. I never broke Out of my blundering self into the world But let it all go past me like a man Half asleep in a land that's full of wars. What a grand thing 'twould be if I could go Back to the kennels now and take my hounds For summer exercise be riding out With forty couple when the quiet skies Are streaked with sunrise and the silly birds Grown hoarse with singing cobwebs on the furze Up on the hill and all the country strange With no one stirring and the horses fresh Sniffing the air I'll never breathe again. . . . . You've brought the lamp then Martha? I've no mind For newspaper to-night nor bread and cheese. Give me the candle and I'll get to bed. WHEN half the drowsy world¨s a-bed And misty morning rises red With jollity of horn and lusty cheer Young Nimrod urges on his dwindling rout Along the blueing coverts we can hear His horse¨s hoofs thud hither and about: In mulberry coat he rides and makes Huge clamour in the sultry brakes. ALONG the wind-swept platform pinched and white The travellers stand in pools of wintry light Offering themselves to morn¨s long slanting arrows. The train¨s due porters trundle laden barrows. The train steams in volleying resplendent clouds Of sun-blown vapour. Hither and about Scared people hurry storming the doors in crowds. The officials seem to waken with a shout Resolved to hoist and plunder some to the vans Leap others rumble the milk in gleaming cans. Boys indolent-eyed from baskets leaning back Question each face a man with a hammer steals Stooping from coach to coach with clang and clack Touches and tests and listens to the wheels. Guard sounds a warning whistle points to the clock With brandished flag and on his folded flock Claps the last door: the monster grunts: ｀Enough!¨ Tightening his load of links with pant and puff. Under the arch then forth into blue day Glide the processional windows on their way And glimpse the stately folk who sit at ease To view the world like kings taking the seas in prosperous weather: drifting banners tell Their progress to the counties with them goes The clamour of their journeying while those Who sped them stand to wave a last farewell. WHEN old Noah stared across the floods Sky and water melted into one Looking-glass of shifting tides and sun. Mountain-tops were few: the ship was foul: All the morn old Noah marvelled greatly At this weltering world that shone so stately Drowning deep the rivers and the plains. Through the stillness came a rippling breeze Noah sighed remembering the green trees. Clear along the morning stooped a bird ！ Lit beside him with a blossomed sprig. Earth was saved and Noah danced a jig. I CANNOT think that Death will press his claim To snuff you out or put you off your game: You¨ll still contrive to play your steady round Though hurricanes may sweep the dismal ground And darkness blur the sandy-skirted green Where silence gulfs the shot you strike so clean. Saint Andrew guard your ghost old David Cleek And send you home to Fifeshire once a week! Good fortune speed your ball upon its way When Heaven decrees its mightiest Medal Day Till saints and angels hymn for evermore The miracle of your astounding score And He who keeps all players in His sight Walking the royal and ancient hills of light Standing benignant at the eighteenth hole To everlasting Golf consigns your soul. BEHOLD these jewelled merchant Ancestors Foregathered in some chancellery of death Calm provident discreet they stroke their beards And move their faces slowly in the gloom And barter monstrous wealth with speech subdued Lustreless eyes and acquiescent lids. And oft in pauses of their conference They listen to the measured breath of night¨s Hushed sweep of wind aloft the swaying trees In dimly gesturing gardens then a voice Climbs with clear mortal song half-sad for heaven. A silent-footed message flits and brings The ghostly Sultan from his glimmering halls A shadow at the window turbaned vast He leans and pondering the sweet influence That steals around him in remembered flowers Hears the frail music wind along the slopes Put forth and fade across the whispering sea. EVENING was in the wood, louring with storm. A time of drought had sucked the weedy pool And baked the channels birds had done with song. Thirst was a dream of fountains in the moon, Or willow-music blown across the water Leisurely sliding on by weir and mill. Uneasy was the man who wandered, brooding, His face a little whiter than the dusk. A drone of sultry wings flicker¨d in his head. The end of sunset burning thro¨ the boughs Died in a smear of red exhausted hours Cumber¨d, and ugly sorrows hemmed him in. He thought: ｀Somewhere there¨s thunder,¨ as he strove To shake off dread he dared not look behind him, But stood, the sweat of horror on his face. He blunder¨d down a path, trampling on thistles, In sudden race to leave the ghostly trees. And: ｀Soon I¨ll be in open fields,¨ he thought, And half remembered starlight on the meadows, Scent of mown grass and voices of tired men, Fading along the field-paths home and sleep And cool-swept upland spaces, whispering leaves, And far off the long churring night-jar¨s note. But something in the wood, trying to daunt him, Led him confused in circles through the thicket. He was forgetting his old wretched folly, And freedom was his need his throat was choking. Barbed brambles gripped and clawed him round his legs, And he floundered over snags and hidden stumps. Mumbling: ｀I will get out! I must get out!¨ Butting and thrusting up the baffling gloom, Pausing to listen in a space ¨twixt thorns, He peers around with peering, frantic eyes. An evil creature in the twilight looping, Flapped blindly in his face. Beating it off, He screeched in terror, and straightway something clambered Heavily from an oak, and dropped, bent double, To shamble at him zigzag, squat and bestial. Headlong he charges down the wood, and falls With roaring brain！agony！the snap¨t spark！ And blots of green and purple in his eyes. Then the slow fingers groping on his neck, And at his heart the strangling clasp of death. HIS headstrong thoughts that once in eager strife Leapt sure from eye to brain and back to eye Weaving unconscious tapestries of life Are now thrust inward dungeoned from the sky. And he who has watched his world and loved it all Starless and old and blind a sight for pity With feeble steps and fingers on the wall Gropes with his staff along the rumbling city. THEY threw me from the gates: my matted hair Was dank with dungeon wetness my spent frame O¨erlaid with marish agues: everywhere Tortured by leaping pangs of frost and flame So hideous was I that even Lazarus there In noisome rags arrayed and leprous shame Beside me set had seemed full sweet and fair And looked on me with loathing. But one came Who laid a cloak on me and brought me in Tenderly to an hostel quiet and clean Used me with healing hands for all my needs. The mortal stain of my reputed sin My state despised and my defil┬d weeds He hath put by as though they had not been. IN gold and grey with fleering looks of sin I watch them come by two by three by four Advancing slow with loutings they begin Their woven measure widening from the door While music-men behind are straddling in With flutes to brisk their feet across the floor ！ And jangled dulcimers and fiddles thin That taunt the twirling antic through once more. They pause and hushed to whispers steal away. With cunning glances silent go their shoon On creakless stairs but far away the dogs Bark at some lonely farm: and haply they Have clambered back into the dusky moon That sinks beyond the marshes loud with frogs. YE hooded witches baleful shapes that moan Quench your fantastic lanterns and be still For now the moon through heaven sails alone Shedding her peaceful rays from hill to hill. The faun from out his dim and secret place Draws nigh the darkling pool and from his dream Half-wakens seeing there his sylvan face Reflected and the wistful eyes that gleam. To his cold lips he sets the pipe to blow Some drowsy note that charms the listening air: The dryads from their trees come down and creep Near to his side monotonous and low He plays and plays till at the woodside there Stirs to the voice of everlasting sleep. WHEN Watkin shifts the burden of his cares And all that irked him in his bound employ Once more become a vagrom-hearted boy He moves to roundelays and jocund airs Loitering with dusty harvestmen he shares Old ale and sunshine or with maids half-coy Pays court to shadows fools himself with joy Shaking a leg at junketings and fairs. Sometimes returning down his breezy miles A snatch of wayward April he will bring Piping the daffodilly that beguiles Foolhardy lovers in the surge of spring. And then once more by lanes and field-path stiles Up the green world he wanders like a king. ACROSS the land a faint blue veil of mist Seems hung the woods wear yet arrayment sober Till frost shall make them flame silent and whist The drooping cherry orchards of October Like mournful pennons hang their shrivelling leaves Russet and orange: all things now decay Long since ye garnered in your autumn sheaves And sad the robins pipe at set of day. Now do ye dream of Spring when greening shaws Confer with the shrewd breezes and of slopes Flower-kirtled and of April virgin guest Days that ye love despite their windy flaws Since they are woven with all joys and hopes Whereof ye nevermore shall be possessed. CRY out on Time that he may take away Your cold philosophies that give no hint Of spirit-quickened flesh fall down and pray That Death come never with a face of flint: Death is our heritage with Life we share The sunlight that must own his darkening hour: Within his very presence yet we dare To gather gladness like a fading flower. For even as this our joy not long may live Perfect and most in change the heart can trace The miracle of life and human things: All we have held to destiny we give Dawn glimmers on the soul-forsaken face Not we but others hear the bird that sings. I. FROM fairest creatures we desire increase, That thereby beauty's rose might never die, But as the riper should by time decease, His tender heir might bear his memory: But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, Making a famine where abundance lies, Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament And only herald to the gaudy spring, Within thine own bud buriest thy content And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding. Pity the world, or else this glutton be, To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee. II. When forty winters shall besiege thy brow, And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, Thy youth's proud livery, so gaz'd on now, Will be a tatter'd weed, of small worth held: Then being ask'd where all thy beauty lies, Where all the treasure of thy lusty days, To say, within thine own deep-sunken eyes, Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise. How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use, If thou couldst answer, 'This fair child of mine Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,' Proving his beauty by succession thine! This were to be new made when thou art old, And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold. III. Look in thy glass, and tell the face thou viewest Now is the time that face should form another Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother, For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? Or who is he so fond will be the tomb Of his self-love, to stop posterity? Thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee Calls back the lovely April of her prime So thou through windows of thine age shalt see, Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time. But if thou live, remember'd not to be, Die single, and thine image dies with thee. IV. Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy? Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, And being frank, she lends to those are free: Than, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse The bounteous largess given thee to give? Profitless usurer, why dost thou use So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live? For having traffic with thyself alone, Thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive: Then how, when Nature calls thee to be gone, What acceptable audit canst thou leave? Thy unus'd beauty must be tomb'd with thee, Which used, lives th' executor to be. V. Those hours, that with gentle work did frame The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell, Will play the tyrants to the very same And that unfair which fairly doth excel For never-resting time leads summer on To hideous winter, and confounds him there Sap check'd-with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone, Beauty o'ersnow'd and bareness every where: Then, were not summer's distillation left, A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet, Leese but their show their substance still lives sweet. VI. Then let not winter's ragged hand deface In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd: Make sweet some vial treasure thou some place With beauty's treasure, ere it be self-kill'd. That use is not forbidden usury, Which happies those that pay the willing loan That's for thyself to breed another thee, Or ten times happier, be it ten for one Ten times thyself were happier than thou art, If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee Then what could death do, if thou shouldst de- part, Leaving thee living in posterity? Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir. VII. Lo! in the orient when the gracious light Lifts up his burning head, each under eye Doth homage to his new-appearing sight, Serving with looks his sacred majesty And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill, Resembling strong youth in his middle age, Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, Attending on his golden pilgrimage But when from highmost pitch, with weary car, Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day, The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are From his low tract, and look another way: So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon, Unlook'd on diest, unless thou get a son. VIII. Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy: Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy? If the true concord of well-tuned sounds, By unions married, do offend thine ear, They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. Mark how one string, sweet husband to another, Strikes each in each by mutual ordering Resembling sire and child and happy mother, Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing: Whose speechless song, being many, seeming one, Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.' IX. Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye That thou consum'st thyself in single life? Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die, The world will wail thee, like a makeless wife The world will be thy widow, and still weep That thou no form of thee hast left behind, When every private widow well may keep By children's eyes her husband's shape in mind. Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it But beauty's waste hath in the world an end, And kept unus'd, the user so destroys it. No love toward others in that bosom sits That on himself such murderous shame com- mits. X. For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any, Who for thyself art so unprovident. Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many, But that thou none lov'st is most evident For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire, Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate Which to repair should be thy chief desire. O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind: Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love? Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind, Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove: Make thee another self, for love of me, That beauty still may live in thine or thee. XI. As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st In one of thine, from that which thou departest And that fresh blood which youngly thou be- stow'st Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest. Herein lives wisdom, beauty and increase Without this, folly, age and cold decay: If all were minded so, the times should cease And threescore year would make the world away. Let those whom Nature hath not made for store, Harsh, featureless and rude, barrenly perish: Look, whom she best endow'd she gave the more Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish: She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby Thou shouldst print more, nor let that copy die. XII. When I do count the clock that tells the time, And see the brave day sunk in hideous night When I behold the violet past prime, And sable curls, all silver'd o'er with white When lofty trees I see barren of leaves, Which erst from heat did canopy the herd, And summer's green all girded up in sheaves, Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard, Then of thy beauty do I question make, That thou among the wastes of time must go, Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake And die as fast as they see others grow And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence. XIII. O! that you were yourself but, love, you are No longer yours than you yourself here live: Against this coming end you should prepare, And your sweet semblance to some other give: So should that beauty which you hold in lease Find no determination then you were Yourself again, after yourself's decease, When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. Who lets so fair a house fall to decay, Which husbandry in honour might uphold Against the stormy gusts of winter's day And barren rage of death's eternal cold? O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know You had a father: let-your son say so. XIV. Not from the stars do I my judgment pluck And yet methinks I have astronomy, But not to tell of good or evil luck, Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell, Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind, Or say with princes if it shall go well, By oft predict that I in heaven find: But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive, And, constant stars, in them I read such art As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive, If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert' Or else of thee this I prognosticate: 'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.' XV. When I consider every thing that grows Holds in perfection but a little moment, That this huge state presenteth nought but shows Whereon the stars in secret influence comment When I perceive that men as plants increase, Cheered and check'd e'en by the self-same sky, Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, And wear their brave state out of memory Then the conceit of this inconstant stay Sets you most rich in youth before my sight, Where wasteful Time debateth with Decay, To change your day of youth to sullied night And, all in war with Time for love of you, As he takes from you, I engraft you new. XVI. But wherefore do not you a mightier way Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time? And fortify yourself in your decay With means more blessed than my barren rime? Now stand you on the top of happy hours, And many maiden gardens, yet unset, With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers Much liker than your painted counterfeit: So should the lines of life that life repair, Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen, Neither in inward worth nor outward fair, Can make you live yourself in eyes of men. To give away yourself keeps yourself still And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill. XVII. Who will believe my verse in time to come, If it were fill'd with your most high deserts? Though yet, heaven knows, it is but as a tomb Which hides your life and shows not half your parts. If I could write the beauty of your eyes And in fresh numbers number all your graces, The age to come would say, 'This poet lies Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.' So should my papers, yellow'd with their age, Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue, And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage And stretched metre of an antique song: But were some child of yours alive that time, You should live twice,！in it and in my rime. XVIII. Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate: Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, And summer's lease hath all too short a date: Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, And often is his gold complexion dimm'd And every fair from fair sometime declines, By chance, or nature's changing course un- trimm'd But thy eternal summer shall not fade, Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade, When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. XIX. Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws, And make the earth devour her own sweet brood Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets, And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time, Fo the wide world and all her fading sweets But I forbid thee one most heinous crime: O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen Him in thy course untainted do allow For beauty's pattern to succeeding men. Yet, do thy worst, old Time: despite thy wrong, My love shall in my verse ever live young. XX. A woman's face with Nature's own hand painted Hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted With shifting change, as is false women's fashion An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth A man in hue all hues in his controlling, Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. And for a woman wert thou first created Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting, And by addition me of thee defeated, By adding one thing to my purpose nothing. But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure, Mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure. XXI. So is it not with me as with that Muse Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse, Who heaven itself for ornament doth use And every fair with his fair doth rehearse, Making a couplement of proud compare, With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems. O! let me, true in love, but truly write, And then believe me, my love is as fair As any mother's child, though not so bright As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air: Let them say more that like of hear-say well I will not praise that purpose not to sell. XXII. My glass shall not persuade me I am old, So long as youth and thou are of one date But when in thee time's furrows I behold, Then look I death my days should expiate. For all that beauty that doth cover thee Is but the seemly raiment of my heart, Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me: How can I then, be elder than thou art? O! therefore, love, be of thyself so wary As I, not for myself, but for thee will Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary As tender nurse her babe from faring ill. Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain Thou gav'st me thine, not to give back again. XXIII. As an unperfect actor on the stage, Who with his fear is put besides his part, Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart So I, for fear of trust, forget to say The perfect ceremony of love's rite, And in mine own love's strength seem to decay, O'ercharg'd with burden of mine own love's might. O! let my books be then the eloquence And dumb presagers of my speaking breast, Who plead for love, and look for recompense, More than that tongue that more hath more express'd. O! learn to read what silent love hath writ: To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit. XXIV. Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd Thy beauty's form in table of my heart My body is the frame wherein 'tis held, And perspective it is best painter's art. For through the painter must you see his skill, To find where your true image pictur'd lies, Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes. Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art, They draw but what they see, know not the heart. XXV. Let those who are in favour with their stars Of public honour and proud titles boast, Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars, Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most. Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread But as the marigold at the sun's eye, And in themselves their pride lies buried, For at a frown they in their glory die. The painful warrior famoused for fight, After a thousand victories once foil'd, Is from the book of honour razed quite, And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd: Then happy I, that love and am belov'd, Where I may not remove nor be removed. XXVI. Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, To thee I send this written ambassage, To witness duty, not to show my wit: Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, But that I hope some good conceit of thine In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it Till whatsoever star that guides my moving Points on me graciously with fair aspect, And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving, To show me worthy of thy sweet respect: Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee Till then not show my head where thou mayst prove me. XXVII. Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed, The dear repose for limbs with travel tir'd But then begins a journey in my head To work my mind, when body's work's expir'd: For then my thoughts！from far where I abide！ Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, And keep my drooping eyelids open wide, Looking on darkness which the blind do see: Save that my soul's imaginary sight Presents thy shadow to my sightless view, Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night, Makes black night beauteous and her old face new. Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind, For thee, and for myself no quiet find. XXVIII. How can I then return in happy plight, That am debarr'd the benefit of rest? When day's oppression is not eas'd by night, But day by night, and night by day oppress'd, And each, though enemies to either's reign, Do in consent shake hands to torture me, The one by toil, the other to complain How far I toil, still further off from thee. I tell the day, to please him thou art bright And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven: So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even. But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, And night doth nightly make griefs strength seem stronger. XXIX. When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes I all alone beweep my outcast state, And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries, And look upon myself, and curse my fate, Wishing me like to one more rich in hope, Featured like him, like him with friends possess'd, Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope, With what I most enjoy contented least Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, Haply I think on thee,！and then my state, Like to the lark at break of day arising From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings. XXX. When to the sessions of sweet silent thought I summon up remembrance of things past, I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought, And with old woes new wail my dear times' waste: Then can I drown an eye, unus'd to flow, For precious friends hid in death's dateless night, And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe, And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight: Then can I grieve at grievances foregone, And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan, Which I new pay as if not paid before. But if the while I think on thee, dear friend, All losses are restor'd and sorrows end. XXXI. Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts, Which I by lacking have supposed dead And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts, And all those friends which I thought buried. How many a holy and obsequious tear Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye, As interest of the dead, which now appear But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie! Thou art the grave where buried love doth live, Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, Who all their parts of me to thee did give, That due of many now is thine alone: Their images I lov'd I view in thee, And thou！all they！hast all the all of me. XXXII. If thou survive my well-contented day, When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover, And shalt by fortune once more re-survey These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover, Compare them with the bettering of the time, And though they be outstripp'd by every pen, Reserve them for my love, not for their rime, Exceeded by the height of happier men. O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: 'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age, A dearer birth than this his love had brought, To march in ranks of better equipage: But since he died, and poets better prove, Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love.' XXXIII. Full many a glorious morning have I seen Flatter the mountain-tops with sovereign eye, Kissing with golden face the meadows green, Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchymy Anon permit the basest clouds to ride With ugly rack on his celestial face, And from the forlorn world his visage hide, Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace: Even so my sun one early morn did shine, With all-triumphant splendour on my brow But, out! alack! he was but one hour mine, The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now. Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth. XXXIV. Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day, And make me travel forth without my cloak, To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke? 'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face, For no man well of such a salve can speak That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace: Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss: The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief To him that bears the strong offence's cross. Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds. XXXV. No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done: Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. All men make faults, and even I in this, Authorising thy trespass with compare, Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,！ Thy adverse party is thy advocate,！ And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence: Such civil war is in my love and hate, That I an accessary needs must be To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me. XXXVI. Let me confess that we two must be twain, Although our undivided loves are one: So shall those blots that do with me remain, Without thy help, by me be borne alone. In our two loves there is but one respect, Though in our lives a separable spite, Which, though it alter not love's sole effect, Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. I may not evermore acknowledge thee, Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame, Nor thou with public kindness honour me, Unless thou take that honour from thy name: But do not so I love thee in such sort As thou being mine, mine is thy good report. XXXVII. As a decrepit father takes delight To see his active child do deeds of youth, So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite, Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, Or any of these all, or all, or more, Entitled in thy parts do crowned sit, I make my love engrafted to this store: So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd, Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give That I in thy abundance am suffic'd And by a part of all thy glory live. Look what is best, that best I wish in thee: This wish I have then ten times happy me! XXXVIII. How can my Muse want subject to invent, While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse Thine own sweet argument, too excellent For every vulgar paper to rehearse? O! give thyself the thanks, if aught in me Worthy perusal stand against thy sight For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, When thou thyself dost give invention light? Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth Than those old nine which rimers invocate And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth Eternal numbers to outhve long date. If my slight Muse do please these curious days, The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise. XXXIX. O! how thy worth with manners may I sing, When thou art all the better part of me? What can mine own praise to mine own self bring? And what is't but mine own when I praise thee? Even for this let us divided live, And our dear love lose name of single one, That by this separation I may give That due to thee, which thou deserv'st alone. O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove, Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave To entertain the time with thoughts of love, Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive, And that thou teachest how to make one twain, By praising him here who doth hence remain. XL. Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all What hast thou then more than thou hadst before? No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call All mine was thine before thou hadst this more Then, if for my love thou my love receivest, I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest But yet be blam'd, if thou thyself deceivest By wilful taste of what thyself refusest. I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief, Although thou steal thee all my poverty And yet, love knows it is a greater grief To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury. Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes. XLI. Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits, When I am sometimes absent from thy heart, Thy beauty and thy years full well befits, For still temptation follows where thou art. Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won, Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd And when a woman woos, what woman's son Will sourly leave her till she have prevail'd? Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear, And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, Who lead thee in their riot even there Where thou art forc'd to break a twofold truth！ Hers, by thy beauty tempting her to thee, Thine, by thy beauty being false to me. XLII. That thou hast her, it is not all my grief, And yet it may be said I lov'd her dearly That she hath thee, is of my wailing chief, A loss in love that touches me more nearly. Loving offenders, thus I will excuse ye: Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her And for my sake even so doth she abuse me, Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her. If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain, And losing her, my friend hath found that loss Both find each other, and I lose both twain, And both for my sake lay on me this cross: But here's the joy my friend and I are one Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone. XLIII. When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see, For all the day they view things unrespected But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee, And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed. Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, How would thy shadow's form form happy show To the clear day with thy much clearer light, When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so! How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made By looking on thee in the living day, When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay! All days are nights to see till I see thee, And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me. XLIV. If the dull substance of my flesh were thought, Injurious distance should not stop my way For then, despite of space, I would be brought, From limits far remote, where thou dost stay. No matter then although my foot did stand Upon the furthest earth remov'd from thee For nimble thought can jump both sea and land. As soon as think the place where he would be. But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought, To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, But that, so much of earth and water wrought, I must attend time's leisure with my moan Receiving nought by elements so slow But heavy tears, badges of either's woe. XLV. The other two, slight air and purging fire, Are both with thee, wherever I abide The first my thought, the other my desire, These present-absent with swift motion slide. For when these quicker elements are gone In tender embassy of love to thee, My life, being made of four, with two alone Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy Until life's composition be recur'd By those sweet messengers return'd from thee, Who even but now come back again, assur'd Of thy fair health, recounting it to me: This told, I joy but then no longer glad, I send them back again, and straight grow sad. XLVI. Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war, How to divide the conquest of thy sight Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar, My heart mine eye the freedom of that right. My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,- A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes,！ But the defendant doth that plea deny, And says in him thy fair appearance lies. To 'cide this title is impannelled A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart And by their verdict is determined The clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part: As thus mine eye's due is thine outward part, And my heart's right thine inward love of heart. XLVII. Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, And each doth good turns now unto the other: When that mine eye is famish'd for a look, Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smo- ther, With my love's picture then my eye doth feast, And to the painted banquet bids my heart Another time mine eye is my heart's guest, And in his thoughts of love doth share a part: So, either by thy picture or my love, Thyself away art present still with me For thou not further than my thoughts canst move, And I am still with them and they with thee Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight Awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight. XLVIII. How careful was I when I took my way, Each trifle under truest bars to thrust, That to my use it might unused stay From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust! But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are, Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, Thou, best of dearest and mine only care, Art left the prey of every vulgar thief. Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest, Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art, Within the gentle closure of my breast, From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part And even thence thou wilt be stol'n, I fear, For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear. XLIX. Against that time, if ever that time come, When I shall see thee frown on my defects, When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum, Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye, When love, converted from the thing it was, Shall reasons find of settled gravity Against that time do I ensconce me here Within the knowledge of mine own desert, And this my hand against myself uprear, To guard the lawful reasons on thy part: To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws, Since why to love I can allege no cause. L. How heavy do I journey on the way, When what I seek, my weary travel's end, Doth teach that ease and that repose to say, 'Thus far the miles are measur'd from thy friend!' The beast that bears me, tired with my woe, Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me, As if by some instinct the wretch did know His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee: The bloody spur cannot provoke him on That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, Which heavily he answers with a groan More sharp to me than spurring to his side For that same groan doth put this in my mind: My grief lies onward, and my joy behind. LI. Thus can my love excuse the slow offence Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed: From where thou art why should I haste me thence? Till I return, of posting is no need. O! what excuse will my poor beast then find, When swift extremity can seem but slow? Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind, In winged speed no motion shall I know: Then can no horse with my desire keep pace Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made, Shall neigh！no dull flesh！in his fiery race But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,！ 'Since from thee going he went wilful-slow, Towards thee I'll run and give him leave to go.' LII. So am I as the rich, whose blessed key Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure, The which he will not every hour survey, For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, Since, seldom coming, in the long year set, Like stones of worth they thinly placed are, Or captain jewels in the carconet. So is the time that keeps you as my chest, Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, To make some special instant special blest By new unfolding his imprison'd pride. Blessed are you, whose worthiness gives scope, Being had, to triumph being lack'd, to hope. LIII. What is your substance, whereof are you made, That millions of strange shadows on you tend? Since every one hath, every one, one shade, And you, but one, can every shadow lend. Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit Is poorly imitated after you On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set, And you in Grecian tires are painted new: Speak of the spring and foison of the year, The one doth shadow of your beauty show, The other as your bounty doth appear And you in every blessed shape we know. In all external grace you have some part, But you like none, none you, for constant heart. LIV. O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem By that sweet ornament which truth doth give! The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem For that sweet odour which doth in it live. The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye As the perfumed tincture of the roses, Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly When summer's breath their masked buds dis- closes But, for their virtue only is their show, They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made: And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth, When that shall vade, my verse distils your truth. LV. Not marble, nor the gilded monuments Of princes, shall outhve this powerful rime But you shall shine more bright in these con- tents Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time. When wasteful war shall statues overturn, And broils root out the work of masonry, Nor Mars his sword nor war's quick fire shall burn The living record of your memory. 'Gainst death and all-oblivious enmity Shall you pace forth your praise shall still find room Even in the eyes of all posterity That wear this world out to the ending doom. So, till the judgment that yourself arise, You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes. LVI. Sweet love, renew thy force be it not said Thy edge should blunter be than appetite, Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd, To-morrow sharpen'd in his former might: So, love, be thou although to-day thou fill Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness, To-morrrow see again, and do not kill The spirit of love with a perpetual dulness. Let this sad interim like the ocean be Which parts the shore, where two contracted new Come daily to the banks, that, when they see Return of love, more bless'd may be the view Or call it winter, which, being full of care, Makes summer's welcome thrice more wish'd, more rare. LVII. Being your slave, what should I do but tend Upon the hours and times of your desire? I have no precious time at all to spend, Nor services to do, till you require. Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, Nor think the bitterness of absence sour When you have bid your servant once adieu Nor dare I question with my jealous thought Where you may be, or your affairs suppose, But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought, Save, where you are how happy you make those. So true a fool is love that in your will, Though you do anything, he thinks no ill. LVIII. That god forbid that made me first your slave, I should in thought control your times of plea- sure, Or at your hand the account of hours to crave, Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure! O! let me suffer, being at your beck, The imprison'd absence of your liberty And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check, Without accusing you of injury. Be where you list, your charter is so strong That you yourself may privilege your time To what you will to you it doth belong Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime. I am to wait, though waiting so be hell, Not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well. LIX. If there be nothing new, but that which is Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd, Which, labouring for invention, bear amiss The second burden of a former child! O! that record could with a backward look, Even of five hundred courses of the sun, Show me your image in some antique book, Since mind at first in character was done! That I might see what the old world could say To this composed wonder of your frame Whe'r we are mended, or whe'r better they, Or whether revolution be the same. O! sure I am, the wits of former days To subjects worse have given admiring praise. LX. Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, So do our minutes hasten to their end Each changing place with that which goes be- fore, In sequent toil all forwards do contend. Nativity, once in the main of light, Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd, Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, And Time that gave doth now his gift confound. Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow: And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. LXI. Is it thy will thy image should keep open My heavy eyelids to the weary night? Dost thou desire my slumbers should be bro- ken, While shadows, like to thee, do mock my sight? Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee So far from home, into my deeds to pry, To find out shames and idle hours in me, The scope and tenour of thy jealousy? O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great: It is my love that keeps mine eye awake Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, To play the watchman ever for thy sake: For thee watch I whilst thou dost wake else- where, From me far off, with others all too near. LXII. Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye And all my soul and all my every part And for this sin there is no remedy, It is so grounded inward in my heart. Methinks no face so gracious is as mine, No shape so true, no truth of such account And for myself mine own worth do define, As I all other in all worths surmount. But when my glass shows me myself indeed, Beated and chopp'd with tann'd antiquity, Mine own self-love quite contrary I read Self so self-loving were iniquity. 'Tis thee, myself,！that for myself I praise, Painting my age with beauty of thy days. LXIII. Against my love shall be, as I am now, With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow With lines and wrinkles when his youthful morn Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night And all those beauties whereof now he's king Are vanishing or vanish'd out of sight, Stealing away the treasure of his spring For such a time do I now fortify Against confounding age's cruel knife, That he shall never cut from memory My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life: His beauty shall in these black lines be seen, And they shall live, and he in them still green. LXIV. When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd, And brass eternal slave to mortal rage When I have seen the hungry ocean gain Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, And the firm soil win of the watery main, Increasing store with loss, and loss with store When I have seen such interchange of state, Or state itself confounded to decay Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate！ That Time will come and take my love away. This thought is as a death, which cannot choose But weep to have that which it fears to lose. LXV. Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, But sad mortality o'ersways their power, How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower? O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out Against the wrackful siege of battering days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays? O fearful meditation! where, alack, Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? O! none, unless this miracle have might, That in black ink my love may still shine bright. LXVI. Tir'd with all these, for restful death I cry As to behold desert a beggar born, And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity, And purest faith unhappily forsworn, And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd, And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd, And strength by limping sway disabled, And art made tongue-tied by authority, And folly！doctor-like！controlling skill, And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill: Tir'd with all these, from these would I bo gone, Save that, to die, I leave my love alone. LXVII. Ah! wherefore with infection should he live, And with his presence grace impiety, That sin by him advantage should achieve, And lace itself with his society? Why should false painting imitate his cheek, And steal dead seeing of his living hue? Why should poor beauty indirectly seek Roses of shadow, since his rose is true? Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is, Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins? For she hath no exchequer now but his, And, proud of many, lives upon his gains. O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had In days long since, before these last so bad. LXVIII. Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, When beauty liv'd and died as flowers do now, Before these bastard signs of fair were born, Or durst inhabit on a living brow Before the golden tresses of the dead, The right of sepulchres, were shorn away, To live a second life on second head Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay: In him those holy antique hours are seen, Without all ornament, itself and true, Making no summer of another's green, Robbing no old to dress his beauty new And him as for a map doth Nature store, To show false Art what beauty was of yore. LXIX. Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend All tongues！the voice of souls！give thee that due, Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend. Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own, In other accents do this praise confound By seeing farther than the eye hath shown. They look into the beauty of thy mind, And that, in guess, they measure by thy deeds Then,！churls,！their thoughts, although their eyes were kind, To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds: But why thy odour matcheth not thy show, The soil is this, that thou dost common grow. LXX. That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect, For slander's mark was ever yet the fair The ornament of beauty is suspect, A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. So thou be good, slander doth but approve Thy worth the greater, being woo'd of time For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, And thou present'st a pure unstained prime. Thou hast pass'd by the ambush of young days, Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, To tie up envy evermore enlarg'd: If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show, Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe. LXXI. No longer mourn for me when I am dead Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell Give warning to the world that I am fled From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell: Nay, if you read this line, remember not The hand that writ it for I love you so, That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, If thinking on me then should make you woe. O! if,！I say, you look upon this verse, When I perhaps compounded am with clay, Do not so much as my poor name rehearse, But let your love even with my life decay Lest the wise world should look into your moan, And mock you with me after I am gone. LXXII. O! lest the world should task you to recite What merit lived in me, that you should love After my death,！dear love, forget me quite, For you in me can nothing worthy prove Unless you would devise some virtuous lie, To do more for me than mine own desert, And hang more praise upon deceased I Than niggard truth would willingly impart: O! lest your true love may seem false in this, That you for love speak well of me untrue, My name be buried where my body is, And live no more to shame nor me nor you. For I am sham'd by that which I bring forth, And so should you, to love things nothing worth. LXXIII. That time of year thou mayst in me behold When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. In me thou see'st the twilight of such day As after sunset fadeth in the west Which by and by black night doth take away, Death's second self, that seals up all in rest In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire, That on the ashes of his youth doth lie, As the death-bed whereon it must expire Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by. This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, To love that well which thou must leave ere long. LXXIV. But be contented: when that fell arrest Without all bail shall carry me away, My life hath in this line some interest, Which for memorial still with thee shall stay. When thou reviewest this, thou dost review The very part was consecrate to thee: The earth can have but earth, which is his due My spirit is thine, the better part of me: So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, The prey of worms, my body being dead The coward conquest of a wretch's knife, Too base of thee to be remembered. The worth of that is that which it contains, And that is this, and this with thee remains. LXXV. So are you to my thoughts as food to life, Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground And for the peace of you I hold such strife As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon Doubting the filching age will steal his trea- sure Now counting best to be with you alone, Then better'd that the world may see my plea- sure: Sometime, all full with feasting on your sight, And by and by clean starved for a look Possessing or pursuing no delight, Save what is had or must from you be took. Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day, Or gluttoning on all, or all away. LXXVI. Why is my verse so barren of new pride, So far from variation or quick change? Why with the time do I not glance aside To new-found methods and to compounds strange? Why write I still all one, ever the same, And keep invention in a noted weed, That every word doth almost tell my name, Showing their birth, and where they did pro- ceed? O! know, sweet love, I always write of you, And you and love are still my argument So all my best is dressing old words new, Spending again what is already spent: For as the sun is daily new and old, So is my love still telling what is told. LXXVII. Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste The vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear, And of this book this learning mayst thou taste. The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show Of mouthed graves will give thee memory Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know Time's thievish progress to eternity. Look! what thy memory cannot contain, Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain, To take a new acquaintance of thy mind. These offices, so oft as thou wilt look, Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book. LXXVIII. So oft have I invok'd thee for my Muse And found such fair assistance in my verse As every alien pen hath got my use And under thee their poesy disperse. Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing And heavy ignorance aloft to fly, Have added feathers to the learned's wing And given grace a double majesty. Yet be most proud of that which I compile, Whose influence is thine, and born of thee: In others' works thou dost but mend the style, And arts with thy sweet graces graced be But thou art all my art, and dost advance As high as learning my rude ignorance. LXXIX. Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid, My verse alone had all thy gentle grace But now my gracious numbers are decay'd, And my sick muse doth give another place. I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument Deserves the travail of a worthier pen Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent He robs thee of, and pays it thee again. He lends thee virtue, and be stole that word From thy behaviour beauty doth he give, And found it in thy cheek he can afford No praise to thee but what in thee doth live. Then thank him not for that which he doth say, Since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay. LXXX. O! how I faint when I of you do write, Knowing a better spirit doth use your name, And in the praise thereof spends all his might, To make me tongue-tied, speaking of your fame! But since your worth！wide as the ocean is,！ The humble as the proudest sail doth bear, My saucy bark, inferior far to his, On your broad main doth wilfully appear. Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat, He of tall building and of goodly pride: Then if he thrive and I be cast away, The worst was this！my lover was my decay. LXXXI. Or I shall live your epitaph to make, Or you. survive when I in earth am rotten From hence your memory death cannot take, Although in me each part will be forgotten. Your name from hence immortal life shall have, Though I, once gone, to all the world must die: The earth can yield me but a common grave, When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie. Your monument shall be my gentle verse, Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read And tongues to be your being shall rehearse, When all the breathers of this world are dead You still shall live,！such virtue hath my pen,！ Where breath most breathes,！even in the mouths of men. LXXXII. I grant thou wert not married to my Muse, And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook The dedicated words which writers use Of their fair subject, blessing every book. Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, Finding thy worth a limit past my praise And therefore art enforc'd to seek anew Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days. And do so, love yet when they have de-vis'd What strained touches rhetoric can lend, Thou truly fair wert truly sympathized In true plain words by thy true-telling friend And their gross painting might be better used Where cheeks need blood in thee it is abus'd. LXXXIII. I never saw that you did painting need, And therefore to your fair no painting set I found, or thought I found, you did exceed The barren tender of a poet's debt: And therefore have I slept in your report, That you yourself, being extant, well might show How far a modern quill doth come too short, Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. This silence for my sin you did impute, Which shall be most my glory, being dumb For I impair not beauty being mute, When others would give life, and bring a tomb. There lives more life in one of your fair eyes Than both your poets can in praise devise. LXXXIV. Who is it that says most? which can say more Than this rich praise,！that you alone are you? In whose confine immured is the store Which should example where your equal grew. Lean penury within that pen doth dwell That to his subject lends not some small glory But he that writes of you, if he can tell That you are you, so dignifies his story, Let him but copy what in you is writ, Not making worse what nature made so clear, And such a counterpart shall fame his wit, Making his style admired every where. You to your beauteous blessings add a curse, Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse. LXXXV. My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still, Whilst comments of your praise, richly compiled, Deserve their character with golden quill, And precious phrase by all the Muses filed. I think good thoughts, while others write good words, And, like unletter'd clerk, still cry 'Amen' To every hymn that able spirit affords, In polish'd form of well-refined pen. Hearing you prais'd, I say, ' 'Tis so, 'tis true,' And to the most of praise add something more But that is in my thought, whose love to you, Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. Then others for the breath of words respect, Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect. LXXXVI. Was it the proud full sail of his great verse, Bound for the prize of all too precious you, That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? No, neither he, nor his compeers by night Giving him aid, my verse astonished. He, nor that affable familiar ghost Which nightly gulls him with intelligence, As victors of my silence cannot boast I was not sick of any fear from thence: But when your countenance fill'd up his line, Then lack'd I matter that enfeebled mine. LXXXVII. Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing, And like enough thou know'st thy estimate: The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing My bonds in thee are all determinate. For how do I hold thee but by thy granting? And for that riches where is my deserving? The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, And so my patent back again is swerving. Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking So thy great gift, upon misprision growing, Comes home again, on better judgment mak- ing. Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flat- ter, In sleep a king, but, waking, no such matter. LXXXVIII. When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light, And place my merit in the eye of scorn, Upon thy side against myself I'll fight, And prove thee virtuous, though thou art for- sworn. With mine own weakness, being best acquainted, Upon thy part I can set down a story Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted That thou in losing me shalt win much glory: And I by this will be a gainer too For bending all my loving thoughts on thee, The injuries that to myself I do, Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me. Such is my love, to thee I so belong, That for thy right myself will bear all wrong. LXXXIX. Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, And I will comment upon that offence: Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt, Against thy reasons making no defence. Thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill, To set a form upon desired change, As I'll myself disgrace knowing thy will, I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell, Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong, And haply of our old acquaintance tell. For thee, against myself I'll vow debate, For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate. XC. Then hate me when thou wilt if ever, now Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross, Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, And do not drop in for an after-loss: Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow, Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe Give not a windy night a rainy morrow, To linger out a purpos'd overthrow. If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, When other petty griefs have done their spite, But in the onset come: so shall I taste At first the very worst of fortune's might And other strains of woe, which now seem woe, Compar'd with loss of thee will not seem so. XCI. Some glory in their birth, some in their skill, Some in their wealth, some in their body's force Some in their garments, though new-fangled ill Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure, Wherein it finds a joy above the rest: But these particulars are not my measure All these I better in one general best. Thy love is better than high birth to me, Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost, Of more delight than hawks or horses be And having thee, of all men's pride I boast: Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take All this away, and me most wretched make. XCII. But do thy worst to steal thyself away, For term of life thou art assured mine And life no longer than thy love will stay, For it depends upon that love of thine. Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs, When in the least of them my life hath end. I see a better state to me belongs Than that which on thy humour doth depend: Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie. O! what a happy title do I find, Happy to have thy love, happy to die: But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot? Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not. XCIII. So shall I live, supposing thou art true, Like a deceived husband so love's face May still seem love to me, though alter'd new Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place: For there can live no hatred in thine eye, Therefore in that I cannot know thy change. In many's looks the false heart's history Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange, But heaven in thy creation did decree That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell Whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be, Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell. How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show! XCIV. They that have power to hurt and will do none, That do not do the thing they most do show, Who, moving others, are themselves as stone, Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow They rightly do inherit heaven's graces, And husband nature's riches from expense They are the lords and owners of their faces, Others but stewards of their excellence. The summer's flower is to the summer sweet, Though to itself it only live and die, But if that flower with base infection meet, The basest weed outbraves his dignity: For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds. XCV. How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose, Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose. That tongue that tells the story of thy days, Making lascivious comments on thy sport, Cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise Naming thy name blesses an ill report. O! what a mansion have those vices got Which for their habitation chose out thee, Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot And all things turn to fair that eyes can see! Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge. XCVI. Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less: Thou makest faults graces that to thee resort. As on the finger of a throned queen The basest jewel will be well esteem'd, So are those errors that in thee are seen To truths translated and for true things deem'd. How many lambs might the stern wolf betray, If like a lamb he could his looks translate! How many gazers mightst thou lead away, If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! But do not so I love thee in such sort, As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report. XCVII. How like a winter hath my absence been From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! What freezings have I felt. what dark days seen! What old December's bareness every where! And yet this time remov'd was summer's time The teeming autumn, big with rich increase, Bearing the wanton burden of the prime, Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease: Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me But hope of orphans and unfather'd fruit For summer and his pleasures wait on thee, And, thou away, the very birds are mute: Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer, That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near. XCVIII. From you have I been absent in the spring, When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim, Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing, That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him. Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell Of different flowers in odour and in hue, Could make me any summer's story tell, Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew: Nor did I wonder at the lily's white, Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose They were but sweet, but figures of delight, Drawn after you, you pattern of all those. Yet seem'd it winter still, and, you away, As with your shadow I with these did play. XCIX. The forward violet thus did I chide: Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, If not from my love's breath? The purple pride Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed. The lily I condemned for thy hand, And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair The roses fearfully on thorns did stand, One blushing shame, another white despair A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both, And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth A vengeful canker eat him up to death. More flowers I noted, yet I none could see But sweet or colour it had stol'n from thee. C. Where art thou, Muse, that thou forget'st so long To speak of that which gives thee all thy might? Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light? Return, forgetful Muse, and straight redeem In gentle numbers time so idly spent Sing to the car that doth thy lays esteem And gives thy pen both skill and argument. Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey, If Time have any wrinkle graven there If any, be a satire to decay, And make Time's spoils despised every where. Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife. CI. O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed? Both truth and beauty on my love depends So dost thou too, and therein dignified. Make answer, Muso: wilt thou not haply say, 'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay But best is best, if never intermix'd?' Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? Excuse not silence so for't lies in thee To make him much outhve a gilded tomb And to be prais'd of ages yet to be. Then do thy office. Muse I teach thee how To make him seem long hence as he shows now. CII. My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming I love not less, though less the show appear: That love is merchandiz'd whose rich esteeming The owner's tongue doth publish every where. Our love was new, and then but in the spring, When I was wont to greet it with my lays As Philomel in summer's front doth sing, And stops her pipe in growth of riper days: Not that the summer is less pleasant now Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, But that wild music burthens every bough, And sweets grown common lose their dear de- light. Therefore, like her, I sometime hold my tongue, Because I would not dull you with my song. CIII. Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth, That having such a scope to show her pride, The argument, all bare, is of more worth Than when it hath my added praise beside O! blame me not, if I no more can write! Look in your glass, and there appears a face That over-goes my blunt invention quite, Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace. Were it not sinful then, striving to mend, To mar the subject that before was well? For to no other pass my verses tend Than of your graces and your gifts to tell And more, much more, than in my verse can sit, Your own glass shows you when you look in it. CIV. To me, fair friend, you never can be old, For as you were when first your eye I eyed, Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold Have from the forests shook three summers' pride, Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd In process of the seasons have I seen, Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd, Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green. Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial-hand, Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd: For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred: Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead. CV. Let not my love be call'd idolatry, Nor my beloved as an idol show, Since all alike my songs and praises be To one, of one, still such, and ever so. Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind, Still constant in a wondrous excellence Therefore my verse, to constancy confin'd, One thing expressing, leaves out difference. 'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument, 'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words And in this change is my invention spent, Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. 'Fair, kind, and true,' have often lived alone, Which three till now never kept seat in one. CVI. When in the chronicle of wasted time I see descriptions of the fairest wights, And beauty making beautiful old rime, In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, I see their antique pen would have express'd Even such a beauty as you master now. So all their praises are but prophecies Of this our time, all you prefiguring And, for they look'd but with divining eyes, They had not skill enough your worth to sing: For we, which now behold these present days, Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise. CVII. Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul Of the wide world dreaming on things to come, Can yet the lease of my true love control, Suppos'd as forfeit to a confin'd doom. The mortal moon hath her eclipse endured, And the sad augurs mock their own presage Incertainties now crown themselves assured, And peace proclaims olives of endless age. Now with the drops of this most balmy time My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes, Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime, While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes: And thou in this shalt find thy monument, When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent. CVIII. What's in the brain, that ink may character, Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit? What's new to speak, what new to register, That may express my love, or thy dear merit? Nothing, sweet boy but yet, like prayers divine, I must each day say o'er the very same Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine, Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name. So that eternal love in love's fresh case Weighs not the dust and injury of age, Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, But makes antiquity for aye his page Finding the first conceit of love there bred, Where time and outward form would show it dead. CIX. O! never say that I was false of heart, Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify. As easy might I from myself depart As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie: That is my home of love: if I have rang'd, Like him that travels, I return again Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd, So that myself bring water for my stain. Never believe, though in my nature reign'd All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, That it could so preposterously be stain'd, To leave for nothing all thy sum of good For nothing this wide universe I call, Save thou, my rose in it thou art my all. CX. Alas! 'tis true I have gone here and there, And made myself a motley to the view, Gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, Made old offences of affections new Most true it is that I have look'd on truth Askance and strangely but, by all above, These blenches gave my heart another youth, And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love. Now all is done, save what shall have no end: Mine appetite I never more will grind On newer proof, to try an older friend, A god in love, to whom I am confin'd. Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best, Even to thy pure and most most loving breast. CXI. O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, That did not better for my life provide Than public means which public manners breeds. Thence comes it that my name receives a brand, And almost thence my nature is subdu'd To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection No bitterness that I will bitter think, Nor double penance, to correct correction. Pity me, then, dear friend, and I assure ye Even that your pity is enough to cure me CXII. Your love and pity doth the impression fill Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow For what care I who calls me well or ill, So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? You are my all-the-world, and I must strive To know my shames and praises from your tongue None else to me, nor I to none alive, That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong. In so profound abysm I throw all care Of other's voices, that my adder's sense To critic and to flatterer stopped are. Mark how with my neglect I do dispense: You are so strongly in my purpose bred, That all the world besides methinks are dead. CXIII. Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind And that which governs me to go about Doth part his function and is partly blind, Seems seeing, but effectually is out For it no form delivers to the heart Of bird, of flower, or shape, which it doth latch: Of his quick objects hath the mind no part, Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight, The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature, The mountain or the sea, the day or night, The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature: Incapable of more, replete with you, My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue. CXIV. Or whether doth my mind being crown'd with you, Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery? Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true, And that your love taught it this alchymy, To make of monsters and things indigest Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, Creating every bad a perfect best, As fast as objects to his beams assemble? O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing, And my great mind most kingly drinks it up: Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing, And to his palate doth prepare the cup: If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin That mine eye loves it and doth first begin. CXV. Those lines that I before have writ do lie, Even those that said I could not love you dearer: Yet then my judgment knew no reason why My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, Divert strong minds to the course of altering things Alas! why, fearing of Time's tyranny, Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,' When I was certain o'er incertainty, Crowning the present, doubting of the rest? Love is a babe then might I not say so, To give full growth to that which still doth grow? CXVI. Let me not to the marriage of true minds Admit impediments. Love is not love Which alters when it alteration finds, Or bends with the remover to remove: O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark, That looks on tempests and is never shaken It is the star to every wandering bark, Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks Within his bending sickle's compass come Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, But bears it out even to the edge of doom. If this be error, and upon me proved, I never writ, nor no man ever loved. CXVII. Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all Wherein I should your great deserts repay, Forgot upon your dearest love to call, Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day That I have frequent been with unknown minds, And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right That I have hoisted sail to all the winds Which should transport me furthest from your sight. Book both my wilfulness and errors down, And on just proof surmise accumulate Bring me within the level of your frown, But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate Since my appeal says I did strive to prove The constancy and virtue of your love. CXVIII. Like as, to make our appetites more keen, With eager compounds we our palate urge As, to prevent our maladies unseen, We sicken to shun sickness when we purge Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweet- ness, To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness To be diseas'd, ere that there was true need- ing. Thus policy in love, to anticipate The ills that were not grew to faults assur'd, And brought to medicine a healthful state, Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd But thence I learn, and find the lesson true, Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you. CXIX. What potions have I drunk of Siren tears, Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within, Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, Still losing when I saw myself to wn! What wretched errors hath my heart committed, Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never! How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted, In the distraction of this madding fever! O benefit of ill! now I find true That better is by evil still made better And ruin'd love, when it is built anew, Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. So I return rebuk'd to my content, And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent. CXX. That you were once unkind befriends me now, And for that sorrow, which I then did feel, Needs must I under my transgression bow, Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel. For if you were by my unkindness shaken, As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime. O! that our night of woe might have remember'd My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits! But that your trespass now becomes a fee Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me. CXXI. 'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd, When not to be receives reproach of being And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing: For why should others' false adulterate eyes Give salutation to my sportive blood? Or on my frailties why are frailer spies, Which in their wills count bad what I think good? No, I am that I am, and they that level At my abuses reckon up their own: I may be straight though they themselves be bevel By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown Unless this general evil they maintain, All men are bad and in their badness reign. CXXII. Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain Full character'd with lasting memory, Which shall above that idle rank remain, Beyond all date, even to eternity: Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart Have faculty by nature to subsist Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd That poor retention could not so much hold, Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score Therefore to give them from me was I bold, To trust those tables that receive thee more To keep an adjunct to remember thee Were to import forgetfulness in me. CXXIII. No, Time, thou shall not boast that I do change: Thy pyramids built up with newer might To me are nothing novel, nothing strange They are but dressings of a former sight. Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire What thou dost foist upon us that is old And rather make them born to our desire Than think that we before have heard them told. Thy registers and thee I both defy, Not wondering at the present nor the past, For thy records and what we see doth lie, Made more or less by thy continual haste. This I do vow, and this shall ever be I will be true, despite thy scythe and thee. CXXIV. If my dear love were but tile child of state, It might for Fortune's bastard be unfathered, As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate, Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd. No, it was builded far from accident It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls Under the blow of thralled discontent, Whereto the inviting time our fashion calls: It fears not policy, that heretic, Which works on leases of short number'd hours But all alone stands hugely politic, That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers. To this I witness call the fools of time, Which die for goodness, who have liv'd for crime. CXXV. Were't aught to me I bore the canopy, With my extern the outward honouring, Or laid great bases for eternity, Which prove more short than waste or ruin ing? Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour Lose all and more by paying too much rent, For compound sweet foregoing simple savour Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? No let me be obsequious in thy heart, And take thou my oblation, poor but free, Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art, But mutual render, only me for thee. Hence, thou suborn'd informer! a true soul When moat impeach'd stands least in thy control. CXXVI. O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle hour Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st Thy lovers withering as thy sweet self grow'st If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back, She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill. Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure! She may detain, but not still keep, her trea- sure: Her audit, though delay'd, answer'd must be, And her quietus is to render thee. CXXVII. In the old age black was not counted fair, Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name But now is black beauty's successive heir, And beauty slander'd with a bastard's shame: For since each hand hath put on Nature's power, Fairing the foul with Art's false borrow'd face, Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower, But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace. Therefore my mistress' brows are raven black, Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack, Sland'ring creation with a false esteem: Yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe, That every tongue says beauty should look so. CXXVIII. How oft, when thou, my music, music play'st, Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds With thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st The wiry concord that mine ear confounds, Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap To kiss the tender inward of thy hand, Whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap, At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand! To be so tickl'd, they would change their state And situation with those dancing chips, O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips. Since saucy jacks so happy are in this, Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss. CXXIX. The expense of spirit in a waste of shame Is lust in action and till action, lust Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame, Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight Past reason hunted and no sooner had, Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait, On purpose laid to make the taker mad: Mad in pursuit, and in possession so Had, having, and in quest to have, extreme A bliss in proof,！and prov'd, a very woe Before, a joy propos'd behind, a dream. All this the world well knows yet none knows well To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell. CXXX. My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun Coral is far more red than her lips' red: If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head. I have seen roses damask'd, red and white, But no such roses see I in her cheeks And in some perfumes is there more delight Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. I love to hear her speak, yet well I know That music hath a far more pleasing sound: I grant I never saw a goddess go,！ My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground: And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare As any she belied with false compare. CXXXI. Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel. Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold, Thy face hath not the power to make love groan: To say they err I dare not be so bold, Although I swear it to myself alone. And to be sure that is not false I swear, A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face, One on another's neck, do witness bear Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place. In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds. CXXXII. Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me, Knowing thy heart torments me with disdain, Have put on black and loving mourners be, Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain. And truly not the morning sun of heaven Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east, Nor that full star that ushers in the even, Doth half that glory to the sober west, As those two mourning eyes become thy face: O! let it then as well beseem thy heart To mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace, And suit thy pity like in every part. Then will I swear beauty herself is black, And all they foul that thy complexion lack. CXXXIII. Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan For that deep wound it gives my friend and me! Is't not enough to torture me alone, But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken, And my next self thou harder hast engross'd: Of him, myself, and thee, I am forsaken A torment thrice threefold thus to be cross'd. Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard Thou canst not then use rigour In my jail: And yet thou wilt for I, being pent in thee, Perforce am thine, and all that is in me. CXXXIV. So, now I have confessed that he is thine, And I myself am mortgaged to thy will, Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine Thou wilt restore, to be my comfort still: But thou wilt not, no? he will not be free, For thou art covetous and he is kind He learn'd but surety-like to write for me, Under that bond that him as fast doth bind. The statule of thy beauty thou wilt take, Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use, And sue a friend came debtor for my sake So him I lose through my unkind abuse. Him have I lost thou hast both him and me: He pays the whole, and yet am I not free. CXXXV. Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy Will, And Will to boot, and Will in over-plus More than enough am I that vex thee still, To thy sweet will making addition thus. Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? Shall will in. others seem right gracious, And in my will no fair acceptance shine? The sea, all water, yet receives rain still, And in abundance addeth to his store So thou, being rich in Will, add to thy Will One will of mine, to make thy large Will more. Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill Think all but one, and me in that one Will. CXXXVI. If thy soul check thee that I come so near, Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy Will, And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil. Will will fulfil the treasure of thy love, Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one. In things of great receipt with ease we prove Among a number one is reckoned none: Then in the number let me pass untold, Though in thy stores' account I one must be For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold That nothing me, a something sweet to thee: Make but my name thy love, and love that still, And then thou lov'st me,！for my name is Will. CXXXVII. Thou blind fool. Love, what dost thou to mine eyes, That they behold, and see not what they see? They know what beauty is, see where it lies, Yet what the best is take the worst to be. If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks, Be anchored in the bay where all men ride, Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks, Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? Why should my heart think that a several plot Which my heart knows the wide world's common place? Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not, To put fair truth upon so foul a face? In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd, And to this false plague are they now trans- ferr'd. CXXXVIII. When my love swears that she is made of truth, I do believe her, though I know she lies, That she might think me some untutor'd youth, Unlearned in the world's false subtleties. Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, Although she knows my days are past the best, Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue: On both sides thus is simple truth supprest. But wherefore says she not she is unjust? And wherefore say not I that I am old? O! love's best habit is in seeming trust, And age in love loves not to have years told: Therefore I lie with her, and she with me, And in our faults by lies we flatter'd, be. CXXXIX. O! call not me to justify the wrong That thy unkindness lays upon my heart Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue: Use power with power, and slay me not by art. Tell me thou lovest elsewhere but in my sight, Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside: What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide? Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows Her pretty looks have been my enemies And therefore from my face she turns my foes, That they elsewhere might dart their injuries: Yet do not so but since I am near slain, Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain. CXL. Be wise as thou art cruel do not press My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express The manner of my pity-wanting pain. If I might teach thee wit, better it were, Though not to love, yet, Iove, to tell me so！ As testy sick men, when their deaths be near, No news but health from their physicians know！ For, if I should despair, I should grow mad, And in my madness might speak ill of thee: Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be. That I may not be so, nor thou belied, Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide. CXLI. In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, Who, in despite of view, is pleas'd to dote. Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune de- lighted Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone. Nor taste nor smell desire to be invited To any sensual feast with thee alone: But my five wits nor my five senses can Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man, Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be: Only my plague thus far I count my gain, That she that makes me sin awards me pain. CXLII. Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving: O! but with mine compare thou thine own state, And thou shalt find it merits not reproving Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine, Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents. Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee: Root pity in thy heart, that when it grows, Thy pity may deserve to pitied be. If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, By self-example mayst thou be denied! CXLIII. Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch One of her feather'd creatures broke away, Sets down her babe, and makes all quick dispatch In pursuit of the thing she would have stay Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent To follow that which flies before her face, Not prizing her poor infant's discontent: So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee, Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind So will I pray that thou mayst have thyWill, If thou turn back and my loud crying still. CXLIV. Two loves I have of comfort and despair, Which like two spirits do suggest me still: The better angel is a man right fair, The worser spirit a woman, colour'd ill. To win me soon to hell, my female evil Tempteth my better angel from my side, And would corrupt my saint to be a devil, Wooing his purity with her foul pride. And whether that my angel be tum'd fiend Suspect I may, but not directly tell But being both from me, both to each friend, I guess one angel in another's hell: Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt, Till my bad angel fire my good one out. CXLV. Those lips that Love's own hand did make, Breath'd forth the sound that said 'I hate,' To me that languish'd for her sake: But when she saw my woeful state, Straight in her heart did mercy come, Chiding that tongue that ever sweet Was us'd in giving gentle doom And taught it thus anew to greet 'I hate,' she alter'd with an end, That follow'd it as gentle day Doth follow night, who like a fiend From heaven to hell is flown away. 'I hate' from hate away she threw, And sav'd my life, saying！'Not you.' CXLVI. Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth, Fool'd by these rebel powers that thee array, Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, Painting thy outward walls so costly gay? Why so large cost, having so short a lease, Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? Shall worms, inheritors of this excess, Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end? Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, And let that pine to aggravate thy store Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross Within be fed, without be rich no more: So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men, And Death once dead, there's no more dying then. CXLVII. My love is as a fever, longing still For that which longer nurseth the disease Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, The uncertain sickly appetite to please. My reason, the physician to my love, Angry that his prescriptions are not kept, Hath left me, and I desperate now approve Desire is death, which physic did except. Past cure I am, now Reason is past care, And frantic-mad with evermore unrest My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are, At random from the truth vainly express'd For I have sworn thee fair,and thought thee bright, Who art as black as hell, as dark as night. CXLVIII. O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head, Which have no correspondence with true sight Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, That censures falsely what they see aright? If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, What means the world to say it is not so? If it be not, then love doth well denote Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no. How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true, That is so vex'd with watching and with tears? No marvel then, though I mistake my view The sun itself sees not till heaven clears. O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind, Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find. CXLIX. Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not, When I against myself with thee partake? Do I not think on thee, when I forgot Am of myself, all tyrant, for thy sake? Who hateth thee that I do call my friend? On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon? Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend Revenge upon myself with present moan? What merit do I in myself respect, That is so proud thy service to despise, When all my best doth worship thy defect, Commanded by the motion of thine eyes? But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind Those that can see thou lov'st and I am blind. CL. O! from what power hast thou this powerful might, With insufficiency my heart to sway? To make me give the lie to my true sight, And swear that brightness doth not grace the day? Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, That in the very refuse of thy deeds There is such strength and warrantise of skill, That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds? Who taught thee how to make me love thee more, The more I hear and see just cause of hate? O! though I love what others do abhor, With others thou shouldst not abhor my state: If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me, More worthy I to be belov'd of thee. CLI. Love is too young to know what conscience is Yet who knows not conscience is born of love? Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss, Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove: For, thou betraying me, I do betray My nobler part to my gross body's treason My soul doth tell my body that he may Triumph in love flesh stays no further reason, But rising at thy name doth point out thee As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride, He is contented thy poor drudge to be, To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. No want of conscience hold it that I call Her' love' for whose dear love I rise and fall. CLII. In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn, But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn, In vowing new hate after new love bearing. But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee, When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, And all my honest faith in thee is lost: For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, Or made them swear against the thing they see For I have sworn thee fair more perjur'd I, To swear against the truth so foul a lie! CLIII. Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep A maid of Dian's this advantage found, And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep In a cold valley-fountain of that ground Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love A dateless lively heat, still to endure, And grew a seething bath, which yet men prove Against strange maladies a sovereign cure. But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired, The boy for trial needs would touch my breast I, sick withal, the help of bath desired, And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest, But found no cure: the bath for my help lies Where Cupid got new fire, my mistress' eyes. CLIV. The little Love-god lying once asleep Laid by bis side his heart-inflaming brand, Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep Came tripping by but in her maiden hand The fairest votary took up that fire Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd And so the general of hot desire Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed. This brand she quenched in a cool well by, Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual, Growing a bath and healthful remedy For men diseas'd but I, my mistress' thrall, Came there for cure, and this by that I prove, Love's fire heats water, water cools not love. I ARISE from dreams of thee In the first sweet sleep of night, When the winds are breathing low And the stars are shining bright！ I arise from dreams of thee, And a spirit in my feet Hath led me！who knows how? To thy chamber-window, Sweet! The wandering airs they faint On the dark, the silent stream The champak odours fail Like sweet thoughts in a dream The nightingale's complaint It dies upon her heart, As I must die on thine, O belov┬d, as thou art! O lift me from the grass! I die, I faint, I fail! Let thy love in kisses rain On my lips and eyelids pale. My cheek is cold and white, alas! My heart beats loud and fast O press it close to thine again Where it will break at last! I FEAR thy kisses gentle maiden Thou needest not fear mine My spirit is too deeply laden Ever to burthen thine. I fear thy mien thy tones thy motion Thou needest not fear mine Innocent is the heart's devotion With which I worship thine. THE fountains mingle with the river And the rivers with the ocean The winds of heaven mix for ever With a sweet emotion Nothing in the world is single All things by a law divine In one another's being mingle！ Why not I with thine? See the mountains kiss high heaven And the waves clasp one another No sister-flower would be forgiven If it disdain'd its brother And the sunlight clasps the earth And the moonbeams kiss the sea！ What are all these kissings worth If thou kiss not me? SWIFTLY walk over the western wave Spirit of Night! Out of the misty eastern cave Where all the long and lone daylight Thou wovest dreams of joy and fear Which make thee terrible and dear ！ Swift be thy flight! Wrap thy form in a mantle gray Star-inwrought Blind with thine hair the eyes of Day Kiss her until she be wearied out: Then wander o'er city and sea and land Touching all with thine opiate wand！ Come long-sought! When I arose and saw the dawn I sigh'd for thee When light rode high and the dew was gone And noon lay heavy on flower and tree And the weary Day turn'd to his rest Lingering like an unloved guest I sigh'd for thee. Thy brother Death came and cried Wouldst thou me? Thy sweet child Sleep the filmy-eyed Murmur'd like a noontide bee Shall I nestle near thy side? Wouldst thou me? ！And I replied No, not thee! Death will come when thou art dead Soon too soon Sleep will come when thou art fled: Of neither would I ask the boon I ask of thee belov┬d Night！ Swift be thine approaching flight Come soon soon! WHEN the lamp is shatter'd The light in the dust lies dead！ When the cloud is scatter'd The rainbow's glory is shed. When the lute is broken Sweet tones are remember'd not When the lips have spoken Lov'd accents are soon forgot. As music and splendour Survive not the lamp and the lute The heart's echoes render No song when the spirit is mute！ No song but sad dirges Like the wind through a ruin'd cell Or the mournful surges That ring the dead seaman's knell. When hearts have once mingl'd Love first leaves the well-built nest The weak one is singl'd To endure what it once possesst. O Love! who bewailest The frailty of all things here Why choose you the frailest For your cradle your home and your bier? Its passions will rock thee As the storms rock the ravens on high Bright reason will mock thee Like the sun from a wintry sky. From thy nest every rafter Will rot and thine eagle home Leave thee naked to laughter When leaves fall and cold winds come. ONE word is too often profaned For me to profane it One feeling too falsely disdain'd For thee to disdain it. One hope is too like despair For prudence to smother And pity from thee more dear Than that from another. I can give not what men call love But wilt thou accept not The worship the heart lifts above And the Heavens reject not: The desire of the moth for the star Of the night for the morrow The devotion to something afar From the sphere of our sorrow? RARELY rarely comest thou Spirit of Delight! Wherefore hast thou left me now Many a day and night? Many a weary night and day 'Tis since thou art fled away. How shall ever one like me Win thee back again? With the joyous and the free Thou wilt scoff at pain. Spirit false! thou hast forgot All but those who need thee not. As a lizard with the shade Of a trembling leaf Thou with sorrow art dismay'd Even the sighs of grief Reproach thee that thou art not near And reproach thou wilt not hear. Let me set my mournful ditty To a merry measure Thou wilt never come for pity Thou wilt come for pleasure: Pity then will cut away Those cruel wings and thou wilt stay. I love all that thou lovest Spirit of Delight! The fresh earth in new leaves drest And the starry night Autumn evening and the morn When the golden mists are born. I love snow and all the forms Of the radiant frost I love waves and winds and storms Everything almost Which is Nature's and may be Untainted by man's misery. I love tranquil solitude And such society As is quiet wise and good Between thee and me What diff'rence? but thou dost possess The things I seek not love them less. I love Love！though he has wings And like light can flee But above all other things Spirit I love thee！ Thou art love and life! O come! Make once more my heart thy home! THE sun is warm the sky is clear The waves are dancing fast and bright Blue isles and snowy mountains wear The purple noon's transparent might: The breath of the moist earth is light Around its unexpanded buds Like many a voice of one delight！ The winds' the birds' the ocean-floods'！ The city's voice itself is soft like solitude's. I see the deep's untrampled floor With green and purple seaweeds strown I see the waves upon the shore Like light dissolved in star-showers thrown. I sit upon the sands alone The lightning of the noontide ocean Is flashing round me and a tone Arises from its measured motion！ How sweet did any heart now share in my emotion! Alas! I have nor hope nor health Nor peace within nor calm around Nor that content surpassing wealth The sage in meditation found And walk'd with inward glory crown'd Nor fame nor power nor love nor leisure. Others I see whom these surround！ Smiling they live and call life pleasure: To me that cup has been dealt in another measure. Yet now despair itself is mild Even as the winds and waters are I could lie down like a tired child And weep away the life of care Which I have borne and yet must bear ！ Till death like sleep might steal on me And I might feel in the warm air My cheek grow cold and hear the sea Breathe o'er my dying brain its last monotony. HAIL to thee, blithe spirit! Bird thou never wert, That from heaven, or near it, Pourest thy full heart In profuse strains of unpremeditated art. Higher still and higher From the earth thou springest, Like a cloud of fire The blue deep thou wingest, And singing still dost soar, and soaring ever singest. In the golden lightning Of the sunken sun, O'er which clouds are bright'ning, Thou dost float and run, Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun. The pale purple even Melts around thy flight Like a star of heaven In the broad daylight, Thou art unseen, but yet I hear thy shrill delight！ Keen as are the arrows Of that silver sphere, Whose intense lamp narrows In the white dawn clear Until we hardly see, we feel that it is there. All the earth and air With thy voice is loud！ As, when night is bare, From one lonely cloud The moon rains out her beams, and heaven is overflow'd. What thou art we know not What is most like thee?！ From rainbow clouds there flow not Drops so bright to see As from thy presence showers a rain of melody: Like a poet hidden In the light of thought, Singing hymns unbidden, Till the world is wrought To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not: Like a high-born maiden In a palace tower, Soothing her love-laden Soul in secret hour With music sweet as love, which overflows her bower: Like a glow-worm golden In a dell of dew, Scattering unbeholden Its aerial hue Among the flowers and grass, which screen it from the view: Like a rose embower'd In its own green leaves, By warm winds deflower'd, Till the scent it gives Makes faint with too much sweet these heavy-wing┬d thieves. Sound of vernal showers On the twinkling grass, Rain-awaken'd flowers！ All that ever was Joyous, and clear, and fresh, thy music doth surpass. Teach us, sprite or bird, What sweet thoughts are thine: I have never heard Praise of love or wine That panted forth a flood of rapture so divine. Chorus hymeneal, Or triumphal chaunt, Match'd with thine, would be all But an empty vaunt！ A thing wherein we feel there is some hidden want. What objects are the fountains Of thy happy strain? What fields, or waves, or mountains? What shapes of sky or plain? What love of thine own kind? what ignorance of pain? With thy clear keen joyance Languor cannot be Shadow of annoyance Never came near thee: Thou lovest but ne'er knew love's sad satiety. Waking or asleep, Thou of death must deem Things more true and deep Than we mortals dream, Or how could thy notes flow in such a crystal stream? We look before and after, And pine for what is not: Our sincerest laughter With some pain is fraught Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought. Yet if we could scorn Hate, and pride, and fear If we were things born Not to shed a tear, I know not how thy joy we ever should come near. Better than all measures Of delightful sound, Better than all treasures That in books are found, Thy skill to poet were, thou scorner of the ground! Teach me half the gladness That thy brain must know！ Such harmonious madness From my lips would flow, The world should listen then, as I am listening now! I MET a traveller from an antique land Who said:！Two vast and trunkless legs of stone Stand in the desert. Near them on the sand Half sunk a shatter'd visage lies whose frown And wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command Tell that its sculptor well those passions read Which yet survive stamp'd on these lifeless things The hand that mock'd them and the heart that fed. And on the pedestal these words appear: My name is Ozymandias, king of kings: Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair! Nothing beside remains: round the decay Of that colossal wreck boundless and bare The lone and level sands stretch far away. ARIEL to Miranda:！Take This slave of music for the sake Of him who is the slave of thee And teach it all the harmony In which thou canst and only thou Make the delighted spirit glow Till joy denies itself again And too intense is turn'd to pain. For by permission and command Of thine own Prince Ferdinand Poor Ariel sends this silent token Of more than ever can be spoken Your guardian spirit Ariel who From life to life must still pursue Your happiness for thus alone Can Ariel ever find his own. From Prospero's enchanted cell As the mighty verses tell To the throne of Naples he Lit you o'er the trackless sea Flitting on your prow before Like a living meteor. When you die the silent Moon In her interlunar swoon Is not sadder in her cell Than deserted Ariel:！ When you live again on earth Like an unseen Star of birth Ariel guides you o'er the sea Of life from your nativity:！ Many changes have been run Since Ferdinand and you begun Your course of love and Ariel still Has track'd your steps and served your will. Now in humbler happier lot This is all remember'd not And now alas the poor Sprite is Imprison'd for some fault of his In a body like a grave！ From you he only dares to crave For his service and his sorrow A smile to-day a song to-morrow. The artist who this viol wrought To echo all harmonious thought Fell'd a tree while on the steep The woods were in their winter sleep Rock'd in that repose divine On the wind-swept Apennine And dreaming some of autumn past And some of spring approaching fast And some of April buds and showers And some of songs in July bowers And all of love and so this tree ！ Oh that such our death may be!！ Died in sleep and felt no pain To live in happier form again: From which beneath heaven's fairest star The artist wrought this loved guitar And taught it justly to reply To all who question skilfully In language gentle as thine own Whispering in enamour'd tone Sweet oracles of woods and dells And summer winds in sylvan cells. For it had learnt all harmonies Of the plains and of the skies Of the forests and the mountains And the many-voic┬d fountains The clearest echoes of the hills The softest notes of falling rills The melodies of birds and bees The murmuring of summer seas And pattering rain and breathing dew And airs of evening and it knew That seldom-heard mysterious sound Which driven on its diurnal round As it floats through boundless day Our world enkindles on its way:！ All this it knows but will not tell To those who cannot question well The spirit that inhabits it: It talks according to the wit Of its companions and no more Is heard than has been felt before By those who tempt it to betray These secrets of an elder day. But sweetly as its answers will Flatter hands of perfect skill It keeps its highest holiest tone For one beloved Friend alone. BEST and brightest come away ！ Fairer far than this fair day Which like thee to those in sorrow Comes to bid a sweet good-morrow To the rough year just awake In its cradle on the brake. The brightest hour of unborn Spring Through the winter wandering Found it seems the halcyon morn To hoar February born Bending from heaven in azure mirth It kiss'd the forehead of the earth And smiled upon the silent sea And bade the frozen streams be free And waked to music all their fountains And breathed upon the frozen mountains And like a prophetess of May Strew'd flowers upon the barren way Making the wintry world appear Like one on whom thou smilest dear. Away away from men and towns To the wild woods and the downs！ To the silent wilderness Where the soul need not repress Its music lest it should not find An echo in another's mind While the touch of Nature's art Harmonizes heart to heart. Radiant Sister of the Day Awake! arise! and come away! To the wild woods and the plains To the pools where winter rains Image all their roof of leaves Where the pine its garland weaves Of sapless green and ivy dun Round stems that never kiss the sun Where the lawns and pastures be And the sandhills of the sea Where the melting hoar-frost wets The daisy-star that never sets And wind-flowers and violets Which yet join not scent to hue Crown the pale year weak and new When the night is left behind In the deep east dim and blind And the blue noon is over us And the multitudinous Billows murmur at our feet Where the earth and ocean meet And all things seem only one In the universal Sun. NOW the last day of many days, All beautiful and bright as thou, The loveliest and the last, is dead: Rise, Memory, and write its praise! Up！to thy wonted work! come, trace The epitaph of glory fled, For now the earth has changed its face, A frown is on the heaven's brow. We wander'd to the Pine Forest That skirts the ocean's foam. The lightest wind was in its nest, The tempest in its home The whispering waves were half asleep, The clouds were gone to play, And on the bosom of the deep The smile of heaven lay: It seem'd as if the hour were one Sent from beyond the skies Which scatter'd from above the sun A light of Paradise! We paused amid the pines that stood The giants of the waste, Tortured by storms to shapes as rude As serpents interlaced,！ And soothed by every azure breath That under heaven is blown, To harmonies and hues beneath, As tender as its own. Now all the tree-tops lay asleep Like green waves on the sea, As still as in the silent deep The ocean-woods may be. How calm it was!！The silence there By such a chain was bound, That even the busy woodpecker Made stiller by her sound The inviolable quietness The breath of peace we drew With its soft motion made not less The calm that round us grew. There seem'd, from the remotest seat Of the wide mountain waste To the soft flower beneath our feet, A magic circle traced,！ A spirit interfused around A thrilling silent life To momentary peace it bound Our mortal nature's strife！ And still I felt the centre of The magic circle there Was one fair form that fill'd with love The lifeless atmosphere. We paused beside the pools that lie Under the forest bough Each seem'd as 'twere a little sky Gulf'd in a world below！ A firmament of purple light Which in the dark earth lay, More boundless than the depth of night And purer than the day！ In which the lovely forests grew As in the upper air, More perfect both in shape and hue Than any spreading there. There lay the glade and neighbouring lawn, And through the dark-green wood The white sun twinkling like the dawn Out of a speckled cloud. Sweet views which in our world above Can never well be seen Were imaged in the water's love Of that fair forest green And all was interfused beneath With an Elysian glow, An atmosphere without a breath, A softer day below. Like one beloved, the scene had lent To the dark water's breast Its every leaf and lineament With more than truth exprest Until an envious wind crept by, Like an unwelcome thought Which from the mind's too faithful eye Blots one dear image out. ！Though thou art ever fair and kind, The forests ever green, Less oft is peace in Shelley's mind Than calm in waters seen! ART thou pale for weariness Of climbing heaven and gazing on the earth Wandering companionless Among the stars that have a different birth ！ And ever-changing like a joyless eye That finds no object worth its constancy? A WIDOW bird sate mourning for her Love Upon a wintry bough The frozen wind crept on above The freezing stream below. There was no leaf upon the forest bare. No flower upon the ground And little motion in the air Except the mill-wheel's sound. I DREAM'D that as I wander'd by the way Bare winter suddenly was changed to spring, And gentle odours led my steps astray, Mix'd with a sound of waters murmuring Along a shelving bank of turf, which lay Under a copse, and hardly dared to fling Its green arms round the bosom of the stream, But kiss'd it and then fled, as thou mightest in dream. There grew pied wind-flowers and violets, Daisies, those pearl'd Arcturi of the earth, The constellated flower that never sets Faint oxlips tender bluebells, at whose birth The sod scarce heaved and that tall flower that wets！ Like a child, half in tenderness and mirth！ Its mother's face with heaven-collected tears, When the low wind, its playmate's voice, it hears. And in the warm hedge grew lush eglantine, Green cow-bind and the moonlight-colour'd may, And cherry-blossoms, and white cups, whose wine Was the bright dew yet drain'd not by the day And wild roses, and ivy serpentine With its dark buds and leaves, wandering astray And flowers azure, black, and streak'd with gold, Fairer than any waken'd eyes behold. And nearer to the river's trembling edge There grew broad flag-flowers, purple prank'd with white, And starry river-buds among the sedge, And floating water-lilies, broad and bright, Which lit the oak that overhung the hedge With moonlight beams of their own watery light And bulrushes, and reeds of such deep green As soothed the dazzled eye with sober sheen. Methought that of these visionary flowers I made a nosegay, bound in such a way That the same hues, which in their natural bowers Were mingled or opposed, the like array Kept these imprison'd children of the Hours Within my hand,！and then, elate and gay, I hasten'd to the spot whence I had come That I might there present it！oh! to Whom? LIFE of Life! thy lips enkindle With their love the breath between them And thy smiles before they dwindle Make the cold air fire: then screen them In those locks where whoso gazes Faints entangled in their mazes. Child of Light! thy limbs are burning Through the veil which seems to hide them As the radiant lines of morning Through thin clouds ere they divide them And this atmosphere divinest Shrouds thee wheresoe'er thou shinest. Fair are others: none beholds thee But thy voice sounds low and tender Like the fairest for it folds thee From the sight that liquid splendour And all feel yet see thee never As I feel now lost for ever! Lamp of Earth! where'er thou movest Its dim shapes are clad with brightness And the souls of whom thou lovest Walk upon the winds with lightness Till they fail as I am failing Dizzy lost yet unbewailing! MANY a green isle needs must be In the deep wide sea of Misery, Or the mariner, worn and wan, Never thus could voyage on Day and night, and night and day, Drifting on his dreary way, With the solid darkness black Closing round his vessel's track Whilst above, the sunless sky Big with clouds, hangs heavily, And behind the tempest fleet Hurries on with lightning feet, Riving sail, and cord, and plank, Till the ship has almost drank Death from the o'er-brimming deep, And sinks down, down, like that sleep When the dreamer seems to be Weltering through eternity And the dim low line before Of a dark and distant shore Still recedes, as ever still Longing with divided will, But no power to seek or shun, He is ever drifted on O'er the unreposing wave, To the haven of the grave. Ay, many flowering islands lie In the waters of wide Agony: To such a one this morn was led My bark, by soft winds piloted. ！'Mid the mountains Euganean I stood listening to the p?an With which the legion'd rooks did hail The Sun's uprise majestical: Gathering round with wings all hoar, Through the dewy mist they soar Like gray shades, till the eastern heaven Bursts and then！as clouds of even Fleck'd with fire and azure, lie In the unfathomable sky！ So their plumes of purple grain Starr'd with drops of golden rain Gleam above the sunlight woods, As in silent multitudes On the morning's fitful gale Through the broken mist they sail And the vapours cloven and gleaming Follow down the dark steep streaming, Till all is bright, and clear, and still Round the solitary hill. Beneath is spread like a green sea The waveless plain of Lombardy, Bounded by the vaporous air, Islanded by cities fair Underneath day's azure eyes, Ocean's nursling, Venice lies,！ A peopled labyrinth of walls, Amphitrite's destined halls, Which her hoary sire now paves With his blue and beaming waves. Lo! the sun upsprings behind, Broad, red, radiant, half-reclined On the level quivering line Of the waters crystalline And before that chasm of light, As within a furnace bright, Column, tower, and dome, and spire, Shine like obelisks of fire, Pointing with inconstant motion From the altar of dark ocean To the sapphire-tinted skies As the flames of sacrifice From the marble shrines did rise As to pierce the dome of gold Where Apollo spoke of old. Sun-girt City! thou hast been Ocean's child, and then his queen Now is come a darker day, And thou soon must be his prey, If the power that raised thee here Hallow so thy watery bier. A less drear ruin then than now, With thy conquest-branded brow Stooping to the slave of slaves From thy throne among the waves Wilt thou be！when the sea-mew Flies, as once before it flew, O'er thine isles depopulate, And all is in its ancient state, Save where many a palace-gate With green sea-flowers overgrown, Like a rock of ocean's own, Topples o'er the abandon'd sea As the tides change sullenly. The fisher on his watery way, Wandering at the close of day, Will spread his sail and seize his oar Till he pass the gloomy shore, Lest thy dead should, from their sleep, Bursting o'er the starlight deep, Lead a rapid masque of death O'er the waters of his path. Noon descends around me now: 'Tis the noon of autumn's glow, When a soft and purple mist Like a vaporous amethyst, Or an air-dissolv┬d star Mingling light and fragrance, far From the curved horizon's bound To the point of heaven's profound, Fills the overflowing sky, And the plains that silent lie Underneath the leaves unsodden Where the infant Frost has trodden With his morning-wing┬d feet Whose bright print is gleaming yet And the red and golden vines Piercing with their trellised lines The rough, dark-skirted wilderness The dun and bladed grass no less, Pointing from this hoary tower In the windless air the flower Glimmering at my feet the line Of the olive-sandall'd Apennine In the south dimly islanded And the Alps, whose snows are spread High between the clouds and sun And of living things each one And my spirit, which so long Darken'd this swift stream of song,！ Interpenetrated lie By the glory of the sky Be it love, light, harmony, Odour, or the soul of all Which from heaven like dew doth fall, Or the mind which feeds this verse, Peopling the lone universe. Noon descends, and after noon Autumn's evening meets me soon, Leading the infantine moon And that one star, which to her Almost seems to minister Half the crimson light she brings From the sunset's radiant springs: And the soft dreams of the morn (Which like wing┬d winds had borne To that silent isle, which lies 'Mid remember'd agonies, The frail bark of this lone being), Pass, to other sufferers fleeing, And its ancient pilot, Pain, Sits beside the helm again. Other flowering isles must be In the sea of Life and Agony: Other spirits float and flee O'er that gulf: ev'n now, perhaps, On some rock the wild wave wraps, With folding wings they waiting sit For my bark, to pilot it To some calm and blooming cove, Where for me, and those I love, May a windless bower be built, Far from passion, pain, and guilt, In a dell 'mid lawny hills Which the wild sea-murmur fills, And soft sunshine, and the sound Of old forests echoing round, And the light and smell divine Of all flowers that breathe and shine. ！We may live so happy there, That the Spirits of the Air Envying us, may ev'n entice To our healing paradise The polluting multitude: But their rage would be subdued By that clime divine and calm, And the winds whose wings rain balm On the uplifted soul, and leaves Under which the bright sea heaves While each breathless interval In their whisperings musical The inspir┬d soul supplies With its own deep melodies And the Love which heals all strife Circling, like the breath of life, All things in that sweet abode With its own mild brotherhood:！ They, not it, would change and soon Every sprite beneath the moon Would repent its envy vain, And the Earth grow young again! O WILD West Wind, thou breath of Autumn's being！ Thou from whose unseen presence the leaves dead Are driven, like ghosts from an enchanter fleeing, Yellow, and black, and pale, and hectic red, Pestilence-stricken multitudes!！O thou Who chariotest to their dark wintry bed The wing┬d seeds, where they lie cold and low, Each like a corpse within its grave, until Thine azure sister of the Spring shall blow Her clarion o'er the dreaming earth, and fill (Driving sweet buds like flocks to feed in air) With living hues and odours plain and hill！ Wild Spirit, which art moving everywhere！ Destroyer and Preserver！hear, O hear! Thou on whose stream, 'mid the steep sky's commotion, Loose clouds like earth's decaying leaves are shed, Shook from the tangled boughs of Heaven and Ocean, Angels of rain and lightning! they are spread On the blue surface of thine airy surge, Like the bright hair uplifted from the head Of some fierce M?nad, ev'n from the dim verge Of the horizon to the zenith's height！ The locks of the approaching storm. Thou dirge Of the dying year, to which this closing night Will be the dome of a vast sepulchre, Vaulted with all thy congregated might Of vapours, from whose solid atmosphere Black rain, and fire, and hail will burst:！O hear! Thou who didst waken from his summer-dreams The blue Mediterranean, where he lay, Lull'd by the coil of his crystalline streams, Beside a pumice isle in Bai?'s bay, And saw in sleep old palaces and towers Quivering within the wave's intenser day, All overgrown with azure moss, and flowers So sweet, the sense faints picturing them! Thou For whose path the Atlantic's level powers Cleave themselves into chasms, while far below The sea-blooms and the oozy woods which wear The sapless foliage of the ocean, know Thy voice, and suddenly grow gray with fear And tremble and despoil themselves:！O hear! If I were a dead leaf thou mightest bear If I were a swift cloud to fly with thee A wave to pant beneath thy power, and share The impulse of thy strength, only less free Than thou, O uncontrollable!！if even I were as in my boyhood, and could be The comrade of thy wanderings over heaven, As then, when to outstrip thy skiey speed Scarce seem'd a vision,！I would ne'er have striven As thus with thee in prayer in my sore need. O lift me as a wave, a leaf, a cloud! I fall upon the thorns of life! I bleed! A heavy weight of hours has chain'd and bow'd One too like thee！tameless, and swift, and proud. Make me thy lyre, ev'n as the forest is: What if my leaves are falling like its own! The tumult of thy mighty harmonies Will take from both a deep autumnal tone, Sweet though in sadness. Be thou, Spirit fierce, My spirit! be thou me, impetuous one! Drive my dead thoughts over the universe, Like wither'd leaves, to quicken a new birth And, by the incantation of this verse, Scatter, as from an unextinguish'd hearth Ashes and sparks, my words among mankind! Be through my lips to unawaken'd earth The trumpet of a prophecy! O Wind, If Winter comes, can Spring be far behind? ON a Poet's lips I slept Dreaming like a love-adept In the sound his breathing kept Nor seeks nor finds he mortal blisses But feeds on the aerial kisses Of shapes that haunt Thought's wildernesses. He will watch from dawn to gloom The lake-reflected sun illume The blue bees in the ivy-bloom Nor heed nor see what things they be！ But from these create he can Forms more real than living man Nurslings of Immortality! O WORLD! O Life! O Time! On whose last steps I climb Trembling at that where I had stood before When will return the glory of your prime? No more！oh never more! Out of the day and night A joy has taken flight: Fresh spring and summer and winter hoar Move my faint heart with grief but with delight No more！oh never more! MUSIC when soft voices die Vibrates in the memory Odours when sweet violets sicken Live within the sense they quicken Rose leaves when the rose is dead Are heap'd for the belov┬d's bed: And so thy thoughts when thou art gone Love itself shall slumber on. FROM the forests and highlands We come we come From the river-girt islands Where loud waves are dumb Listening to my sweet pipings. The wind in the reeds and the rushes The bees on the bells of thyme The birds on the myrtle bushes The cicale above in the lime And the lizards below in the grass Were as silent as ever old Tmolus was Listening to my sweet pipings. Liquid Peneus was flowing And all dark Tempe lay In Pelion's shadow outgrowing The light of the dying day Speeded by my sweet pipings. The Sileni and Sylvans and Fauns And the Nymphs of the woods and waves To the edge of the moist river-lawns And the brink of the dewy caves And all that did then attend and follow Were silent with love as you now Apollo With envy of my sweet pipings. I sang of the dancing stars I sang of the d?dal earth And of heaven and the giant wars And love and death and birth. And then I changed my pipings！ Singing how down the vale of M?nalus I pursued a maiden and clasp'd a reed: Gods and men we are all deluded thus! It breaks in our bosom and then we bleed. All wept！as I think both ye now would If envy or age had not frozen your blood！ At the sorrow of my sweet pipings. THE world's great age begins anew The golden years return The earth doth like a snake renew Her winter weeds outworn Heaven smiles and faiths and empires gleam Like wrecks of a dissolving dream. A brighter Hellas rears its mountains From waves serener far A new Peneus rolls his fountains Against the morning star Where fairer Tempes bloom there sleep Young Cyclads on a sunnier deep. A loftier Argo cleaves the main Fraught with a later prize Another Orpheus sings again And loves and weeps and dies A new Ulysses leaves once more Calypso for his native shore. O write no more the tale of Troy If earth Death's scroll must be！ Nor mix with Laian rage the joy Which dawns upon the free Although a subtler Sphinx renew Riddles of death Thebes never knew. Another Athens shall arise And to remoter time Bequeath like sunset to the skies The splendour of its prime And leave if naught so bright may live All earth can take or Heaven can give. Saturn and Love their long repose Shall burst more bright and good Than all who fell than One who rose Than many unsubdued: Not gold not blood their altar dowers But votive tears and symbol flowers. O cease! must hate and death return? Cease! must men kill and die? Cease! drain not to its dregs the urn Of bitter prophecy! The world is weary of the past！ O might it die or rest at last! I AND, like a dying lady lean and pale, Who totters forth, wrapp'd in a gauzy veil, Out of her chamber, led by the insane And feeble wanderings of her fading brain, The mood arose up in the murky east, A white and shapeless mass. II Art thou pale for weariness Of climbing heaven and gazing on the earth, Wandering companionless Among the stars that have a different birth, And ever changing, like a joyless eye That finds no object worth its constancy? I ARISE from dreams of thee In the first sweet sleep of night, When the winds are breathing low, And the stars are shining bright. I arise from dreams of thee, And a spirit in my feet Hath led me！who knows how? To thy chamber window, Sweet! The wandering airs they faint On the dark, the silent stream！ And the champak's odours [pine] Like sweet thoughts in a dream The nightingale's complaint, It dies upon her heart, As I must on thine, O belov┬d as thou art! O lift me from the grass! I die! I faint! I fail! Let thy love in kisses rain On my lips and eyelids pale. My cheek is cold and white, alas! My heart beats loud and fast: O press it to thine own again, Where it will break at last! AN IMITATION MY faint spirit was sitting in the light Of thy looks my love It panted for thee like the hind at noon For the brooks my love. Thy barb whose hoofs outspeed the tempest's flight Bore thee far from me My heart for my weak feet were weary soon Did companion thee. Ah! fleeter far than fleetest storm or steed Or the death they bear The heart which tender thought clothes like a dove With the wings of care In the battle in the darkness in the need Shall mine cling to thee Nor claim one smile for all the comfort love It may bring to thee. WHEN the lamp is shatter'd The light in the dust lies dead When the cloud is scatter'd The rainbow's glory is shed When the lute is broken Sweet tones are remember'd not When the lips have spoken Loved accents are soon forgot. As music and splendour Survive not the lamp and the lute The heart's echoes render No song when the spirit is mute！ No song but sad dirges Like the wind through a ruin'd cell Or the mournful surges That ring the dead seaman's knell. When hearts have once mingled Love first leaves the well-built nest The weak one is singled To endure what it once possest. O Love who bewailest The frailty of all things here Why choose you the frailest For your cradle your home and your bier? Its passions will rock thee As the storms rock the ravens on high: Bright reason will mock thee Like the sun from a wintry sky. From thy nest every rafter Will rot and thine eagle home Leave thee naked to laughter When leaves fall and cold winds come. AWAY! the moor is dark beneath the moon Rapid clouds have drunk the last pale beam of even: Away! the gathering winds will call the darkness soon And profoundest midnight shroud the serene lights of heaven. Pause not! the time is past! Every voice cries 'Away!' Tempt not with one last tear thy friend's ungentle mood: Thy lover's eye so glazed and cold dares not entreat thy stay: Duty and dereliction guide thee back to solitude. Away away! to thy sad and silent home Pour bitter tears on its desolated hearth Watch the dim shades as like ghosts they go and come And complicate strange webs of melancholy mirth. The leaves of wasted autumn woods shall float around thine head The blooms of dewy Spring shall gleam beneath thy feet: But thy soul or this world must fade in the frost that binds the dead Ere midnight's frown and morning's smile ere thou and peace may meet. The cloud shadows of midnight possess their own repose For the weary winds are silent or the moon is in the deep Some respite to its turbulence unresting ocean knows Whatever moves or toils or grieves hath its appointed sleep. Thou in the grave shalt rest:！yet till the phantoms flee Which that house and heath and garden made dear to thee erewhile Thy remembrance and repentance and deep musings are not free From the music of two voices and the light of one sweet smile. FRESH Spring, the herald of loves mighty king, In whose cote-armour richly are displayd All sorts of flowers, the which on earth do spring, In goodly colours gloriously arrayd！ Goe to my love, where she is carelesse layd, Yet in her winters bowre not well awake Tell her the joyous time wil not be staid, Unlesse she doe him by the forelock take Bid her therefore her selfe soone ready make, To wayt on Love amongst his lovely crew Where every one, that misseth then her make, Shall be by him amearst with penance dew. Make hast, therefore, sweet love, whilest it is prime For none can call againe the pass┬d time. GLOSS: make] mate. In praise of Eliza Queen of the Shepherds SEE where she sits upon the grassie greene, (O seemely sight!) Yclad in Scarlot, like a mayden Queene, And ermines white: Upon her head a Cremosin coronet With Damaske roses and Daffadillies set: Bay leaves betweene, And primroses greene, Embellish the sweete Violet. Tell me, have ye seene her angelick face Like Phoebe fayre? Her heavenly haveour, her princely grace, Can you well compare? The Redde rose medled with the White yfere, In either cheeke depeincten lively chere: Her modest eye, Her Majestie, Where have you seene the like but there? I see Calliope speede her to the place, Where my Goddesse shines And after her the other Muses trace With their Violines. Bene they not Bay braunches which they do beare, All for Elisa in her hand to weare? So sweetely they play, And sing all the way, That it a heaven is to heare. Lo, how finely the Graces can it foote To the Instrument: They dauncen deffly, and singen soote, In their meriment. Wants not a fourth Grace to make the daunce even? Let that rowme to my Lady be yeven. She shal be a Grace, To fyll the fourth place, And reigne with the rest in heaven. Bring hether the Pincke and purple Cullambine, With Gelliflowres Bring Coronations, and Sops-in-wine Worne of Paramoures: Strowe me the ground with Daffadowndillies, And Cowslips, and Kingcups, and lov┬d Lillies: The pretie Pawnce, And the Chevisaunce, Shall match with the fayre flowre Delice. Now ryse up, Elisa, deck┬d as thou art In royall aray And now ye daintie Damsells may depart Eche one her way. I feare I have troubled your troupes to longe: Let dame Elisa thanke you for her song: And if you come hether When Damsines I gether, I will part them all you among. GLOSS:  medled] mixed.  yfere] together.  soote] sweet.  coronations] carnations.  sops-in-wine] striped pinks.  pawnce] pansy.  chevisaunce] wallflower.  flowre delice] iris. YE learn┬d sisters, which have oftentimes Beene to me ayding, others to adorne, Whom ye thought worthy of your gracefull rymes, That even the greatest did not greatly scorne To heare theyr names sung in your simple layes, But joy┬d in theyr praise And when ye list your owne mishaps to mourne, Which death, or love, or fortunes wreck did rayse, Your string could soone to sadder tenor turne, And teach the woods and waters to lament Your dolefull dreriment: Now lay those sorrowfull complaints aside And, having all your heads with girlands crownd, Helpe me mine owne loves prayses to resound Ne let the same of any be envide: So Orpheus did for his owne bride! So I unto my selfe alone will sing The woods shall to me answer, and my Eccho ring. Early, before the worlds light-giving lampe His golden beame upon the hils doth spred, Having disperst the nights unchearefull dampe, Doe ye awake and, with fresh lusty-hed, Go to the bowre of my belov┬d love, My truest turtle dove Bid her awake for Hymen is awake, And long since ready forth his maske to move, With his bright Tead that flames with many a flake, And many a bachelor to waite on him, In theyr fresh garments trim. Bid her awake therefore, and soone her dight, For lo! the wish┬d day is come at last, That shall, for all the paynes and sorrowes past, Pay to her usury of long delight: And, whylest she doth her dight, Doe ye to her of joy and solace sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Bring with you all the Nymphes that you can heare Both of the rivers and the forrests greene, And of the sea that neighbours to her neare: Al with gay girlands goodly wel beseene. And let them also with them bring in hand Another gay girland For my fayre love, of lillyes and of roses, Bound truelove wize, with a blew silke riband. And let them make great store of bridale poses, And let them eeke bring store of other flowers, To deck the bridale bowers. And let the ground whereas her foot shall tread, For feare the stones her tender foot should wrong, Be strewed with fragrant flowers all along, And diapred lyke the discolored mead. Which done, doe at her chamber dore awayt, For she will waken strayt The whiles doe ye this song unto her sing, The woods shall to you answer, and your Eccho ring. Ye Nymphes of Mulla, which with carefull heed The silver scaly trouts doe tend full well, And greedy pikes which use therein to feed (Those trouts and pikes all others doo excell) And ye likewise, which keepe the rushy lake, Where none doo fishes take Bynd up the locks the which hang scatterd light, And in his waters, which your mirror make, Behold your faces as the christall bright, That when you come whereas my love doth lie, No blemish she may spie. And eke, ye lightfoot mayds, which keepe the deere, That on the hoary mountayne used to towre And the wylde wolves, which seeke them to devoure, With your steele darts doo chace from comming neer Be also present heere, To helpe to decke her, and to help to sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Wake now, my love, awake! for it is time The Rosy Morne long since left Tithones bed, All ready to her silver coche to clyme And Phoebus gins to shew his glorious hed. Hark! how the cheerefull birds do chaunt theyr laies And carroll of Loves praise. The merry Larke hir mattins sings aloft The Thrush replyes the Mavis descant playes The Ouzell shrills the Ruddock warbles soft So goodly all agree, with sweet consent, To this dayes merriment. Ah! my deere love, why doe ye sleepe thus long? When meeter were that ye should now awake, T' awayt the comming of your joyous make, And hearken to the birds love-learn┬d song, The deawy leaves among! Nor they of joy and pleasance to you sing, That all the woods them answer, and theyr eccho ring. My love is now awake out of her dreames, And her fayre eyes, like stars that dimm┬d were With darksome cloud, now shew theyr goodly beams More bright then Hesperus his head doth rere. Come now, ye damzels, daughters of delight, Helpe quickly her to dight: But first come ye fayre houres, which were begot In Joves sweet paradice of Day and Night Which doe the seasons of the yeare allot, And al, that ever in this world is fayre, Doe make and still repayre: And ye three handmayds of the Cyprian Queene, The which doe still adorne her beauties pride, Helpe to addorne my beautifullest bride: And, as ye her array, still throw betweene Some graces to be seene And, as ye use to Venus, to her sing, The whiles the woods shal answer, and your eccho ring. Now is my love all ready forth to come: Let all the virgins therefore well awayt: And ye fresh boyes, that tend upon her groome, Prepare your selves for he is comming strayt. Set all your things in seemely good aray, Fit for so joyfull day: The joyfulst day that ever sunne did see. Faire Sun! shew forth thy favourable ray, And let thy lifull heat not fervent be, For feare of burning her sunshyny face, Her beauty to disgrace. O fayrest Phoebus! father of the Muse! If ever I did honour thee aright, Or sing the thing that mote thy mind delight, Doe not thy servants simple boone refuse But let this day, let this one day, be myne Let all the rest be thine. Then I thy soverayne prayses loud wil sing, That all the woods shal answer, and theyr eccho ring. Harke! how the Minstrils gin to shrill aloud Their merry Musick that resounds from far, The pipe, the tabor, and the trembling Croud, That well agree withouten breach or jar. But, most of all, the Damzels doe delite When they their tymbrels smyte, And thereunto doe daunce and carrol sweet, That all the sences they doe ravish quite The whyles the boyes run up and downe the street, Crying aloud with strong confus┬d noyce, As if it were one voyce, Hymen, i? Hymen, Hymen, they do shout That even to the heavens theyr shouting shrill Doth reach, and all the firmament doth fill To which the people standing all about, As in approvance, doe thereto applaud, And loud advaunce her laud And evermore they Hymen, Hymen sing, That al the woods them answer, and theyr eccho ring. Loe! where she comes along with portly pace, Lyke Phoebe, from her chamber of the East, Arysing forth to run her mighty race, Clad all in white, that seemes a virgin best. So well it her beseemes, that ye would weene Some angell she had beene. Her long loose yellow locks lyke golden wyre, Sprinckled with perle, and perling flowres atweene, Doe lyke a golden mantle her attyre And, being crown┬d with a girland greene, Seeme lyke some mayden Queene. Her modest eyes, abash┬d to behold So many gazers as on her do stare, Upon the lowly ground affix┬d are Ne dare lift up her countenance too bold, But blush to heare her prayses sung so loud, So farre from being proud. Nathlesse doe ye still loud her prayses sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Tell me, ye merchants daughters, did ye see So fayre a creature in your towne before So sweet, so lovely, and so mild as she, Adornd with beautyes grace and vertues store? Her goodly eyes lyke Saphyres shining bright, Her forehead yvory white, Her cheekes lyke apples which the sun hath rudded, Her lips lyke cherryes charming men to byte, Her brest like to a bowle of creame uncrudded, Her paps lyke lyllies budded, Her snowie necke lyke to a marble towre And all her body like a pallace fayre, Ascending up, with many a stately stayre, To honors seat and chastities sweet bowre. Why stand ye still ye virgins in amaze, Upon her so to gaze, Whiles ye forget your former lay to sing, To which the woods did answer, and your eccho ring? But if ye saw that which no eyes can see, The inward beauty of her lively spright, Garnisht with heavenly guifts of high degree, Much more then would ye wonder at that sight, And stand astonisht lyke to those which red Medusaes mazeful hed. There dwels sweet love, and constant chastity, Unspotted fayth, and comely womanhood, Regard of honour, and mild modesty There vertue raynes as Queene in royal throne, And giveth lawes alone, The which the base affections doe obay, And yeeld theyr services unto her will Ne thought of thing uncomely ever may Thereto approch to tempt her mind to ill. Had ye once seene these her celestial threasures, And unreveal┬d pleasures, Then would ye wonder, and her prayses sing, That al the woods should answer, and your echo ring. Open the temple gates unto my love, Open them wide that she may enter in, And all the postes adorne as doth behove, And all the pillours deck with girlands trim, For to receyve this Saynt with honour dew, That commeth in to you. With trembling steps, and humble reverence, She commeth in, before th' Almighties view Of her ye virgins learne obedience, When so ye come into those holy places, To humble your proud faces: Bring her up to th' high altar, that she may The sacred ceremonies there partake, The which do endlesse matrimony make And let the roring Organs loudly play The praises of the Lord in lively notes The whiles, with hollow throates, The Choristers the joyous Antheme sing, That al the woods may answere, and their eccho ring. Behold, whiles she before the altar stands, Hearing the holy priest that to her speakes, And blesseth her with his two happy hands, How the red roses flush up in her cheekes, And the pure snow, with goodly vermill stayne Like crimsin dyde in grayne: That even th' Angels, which continually About the sacred Altare doe remaine, Forget their service and about her fly, Ofte peeping in her face, that seems more fayre, The more they on it stare. But her sad eyes, still fastened on the ground, Are govern┬d with goodly modesty, That suffers not one looke to glaunce awry, Which may let in a little thought unsownd. Why blush ye, love, to give to me your hand, The pledge of all our band! Sing, ye sweet Angels, Alleluya sing, That all the woods may answere, and your eccho ring. Now al is done: bring home the bride againe Bring home the triumph of our victory: Bring home with you the glory of her gaine With joyance bring her and with jollity. Never had man more joyfull day then this, Whom heaven would heape with blis, Make feast therefore now all this live-long day This day for ever to me holy is. Poure out the wine without restraint or stay, Poure not by cups, but by the belly full, Poure out to all that wull, And sprinkle all the postes and wals with wine, That they may sweat, and drunken be withall. Crowne ye God Bacchus with a coronall, And Hymen also crowne with wreathes of vine And let the Graces daunce unto the rest, For they can doo it best: The whiles the maydens doe theyr carroll sing, To which the woods shall answer, and theyr eccho ring. Ring ye the bels, ye yong men of the towne, And leave your wonted labors for this day: This day is holy doe ye write it downe, That ye for ever it remember may. This day the sunne is in his chiefest hight, With Barnaby the bright, From whence declining daily by degrees, He somewhat loseth of his heat and light, When once the Crab behind his back he sees. But for this time it ill ordain┬d was, To chose the longest day in all the yeare, And shortest night, when longest fitter weare: Yet never day so long, but late would passe. Ring ye the bels, to make it weare away, And bonefiers make all day And daunce about them, and about them sing, That all the woods may answer, and your eccho ring. Ah! when will this long weary day have end, And lende me leave to come unto my love? How slowly do the houres theyr numbers spend? How slowly does sad Time his feathers move? Hast thee, O fayrest Planet, to thy home, Within the Westerne fome: Thy tyr┬d steedes long since have need of rest. Long though it be, at last I see it gloome, And the bright evening-star with golden creast Appeare out of the East. Fayre childe of beauty! glorious lampe of love! That all the host of heaven in rankes doost lead, And guydest lovers through the nights sad dread, How chearefully thou lookest from above, And seemst to laugh atweene thy twinkling light, As joying in the sight Of these glad many, which for joy doe sing, That all the woods them answer, and their echo ring! Now ceasse, ye damsels, your delights fore-past Enough it is that all the day was youres: Now day is doen, and night is nighing fast, Now bring the Bryde into the brydall boures. The night is come, now soon her disaray, And in her bed her lay Lay her in lillies and in violets, And silken courteins over her display, And odourd sheetes, and Arras coverlets. Behold how goodly my faire love does ly, In proud humility! Like unto Maia, when as Jove her took In Tempe, lying on the flowry gras, Twixt sleepe and wake, after she weary was, With bathing in the Acidalian brooke. Now it is night, ye damsels may be gon, And leave my love alone, And leave likewise your former lay to sing: The woods no more shall answere, nor your echo ring. Now welcome, night! thou night so long expected, That long daies labour doest at last defray, And all my cares, which cruell Love collected, Hast sumd in one, and cancell┬d for aye: Spread thy broad wing over my love and me, That no man may us see And in thy sable mantle us enwrap, From feare of perrill and foule horror free. Let no false treason seeke us to entrap, Nor any dread disquiet once annoy The safety of our joy But let the night be calme, and quietsome, Without tempestuous storms or sad afray: Lyke as when Jove with fayre Alcmena lay, When he begot the great Tirynthian groome: Or lyke as when he with thy selfe did lie And begot Majesty. And let the mayds and yong men cease to sing Ne let the woods them answer nor theyr eccho ring. Let no lamenting cryes, nor dolefull teares, Be heard all night within, nor yet without: Ne let false whispers, breeding hidden feares, Breake gentle sleepe with misconceiv┬d dout. Let no deluding dreames, nor dreadfull sights, Make sudden sad affrights Ne let house-fyres, nor lightnings helpelesse harmes, Ne let the Pouke, nor other evill sprights, Ne let mischivous witches with theyr charmes, Ne let hob Goblins, names whose sence we see not, Fray us with things that be not: Let not the shriech Oule nor the Storke be heard, Nor the night Raven, that still deadly yels Nor damn┬d ghosts, cald up with mighty spels, Nor griesly vultures, make us once affeard: Ne let th' unpleasant Quyre of Frogs still croking Make us to wish theyr choking. Let none of these theyr drery accents sing Ne let the woods them answer, nor theyr eccho ring. But let stil Silence trew night-watches keepe, That sacred Peace may in assurance rayne, And tymely Sleep, when it is tyme to sleepe, May poure his limbs forth on your pleasant playne The whiles an hundred little wing┬d loves, Like divers-fethered doves, Shall fly and flutter round about your bed, And in the secret darke, that none reproves, Their prety stealthes shal worke, and snares shal spread To filch away sweet snatches of delight, Conceald through covert night. Ye sonnes of Venus, play your sports at will! For greedy pleasure, carelesse of your toyes, Thinks more upon her paradise of joyes, Then what ye do, albe it good or ill. All night therefore attend your merry play, For it will soone be day: Now none doth hinder you, that say or sing Ne will the woods now answer, nor your Eccho ring. Who is the same, which at my window peepes? Or whose is that faire face that shines so bright? Is it not Cinthia, she that never sleepes, But walkes about high heaven al the night? O! fayrest goddesse, do thou not envy My love with me to spy: For thou likewise didst love, though now unthought, And for a fleece of wooll, which privily The Latmian shepherd once unto thee brought, His pleasures with thee wrought. Therefore to us be favorable now And sith of wemens labours thou hast charge, And generation goodly dost enlarge, Encline thy will t'effect our wishfull vow, And the chast wombe informe with timely seed That may our comfort breed: Till which we cease our hopefull hap to sing Ne let the woods us answere, nor our Eccho ring. And thou, great Juno! which with awful might The lawes of wedlock still dost patronize And the religion of the faith first plight With sacred rites hast taught to solemnize And eeke for comfort often call┬d art Of women in their smart Eternally bind thou this lovely band, And all thy blessings unto us impart. And thou, glad Genius! in whose gentle hand The bridale bowre and geniall bed remaine, Without blemish or staine And the sweet pleasures of theyr loves delight With secret ayde doest succour and supply, Till they bring forth the fruitfull progeny Send us the timely fruit of this same night. And thou, fayre Hebe! and thou, Hymen free! Grant that it may so be. Til which we cease your further prayse to sing Ne any woods shall answer, nor your Eccho ring. And ye high heavens, the temple of the gods, In which a thousand torches flaming bright Doe burne, that to us wretched earthly clods In dreadful darknesse lend desir┬d light And all ye powers which in the same remayne, More then we men can fayne! Poure out your blessing on us plentiously, And happy influence upon us raine, That we may raise a large posterity, Which from the earth, which they may long possesse With lasting happinesse, Up to your haughty pallaces may mount And, for the guerdon of theyr glorious merit, May heavenly tabernacles there inherit, Of bless┬d Saints for to increase the count. So let us rest, sweet love, in hope of this, And cease till then our tymely joyes to sing: The woods no more us answer, nor our eccho ring! Song! made in lieu of many ornaments, With which my love should duly have been dect, Which cutting off through hasty accidents, Ye would not stay your dew time to expect, But promist both to recompens Be unto her a goodly ornament, And for short time an endlesse moniment. GLOSS:  tead] torch.  ruddock] redbreast.  croud] violin. CALM was the day, and through the trembling air Sweet-breathing Zephyrus did softly play！ A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay Hot Titan's beams, which then did glister fair When I, (whom sullen care, Through discontent of my long fruitless stay In princes' court, and expectation vain Of idle hopes, which still do fly away Like empty shadows, did afflict my brain,) Walk'd forth to ease my pain Along the shore of silver-streaming Thames, Whose rutty bank, the which his river hems, Was painted all with variable flowers, And all the meads adorn'd with dainty gems Fit to deck maidens' bowers, And crown their paramours Against the bridal day, which is not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. There in a meadow by the river's side A flock of nymphs I chanc┬d to espy, All lovely daughters of the flood thereby, With goodly greenish locks all loose untied As each had been a bride And each one had a little wicker basket Made of fine twigs, entrail┬d curiously. In which they gather'd flowers to fill their flasket, And with fine fingers cropt full feateously The tender stalks on high. Of every sort which in that meadow grew They gather'd some！the violet, pallid blue, The little daisy that at evening closes, The virgin lily and the primrose true, With store of vermeil roses, To deck their bridegrooms' posies Against the bridal day, which was not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. With that I saw two swans of goodly hue Come softly swimming down along the Lee: Two fairer birds I yet did never see The snow which doth the top of Pindus strow Did never whiter show, Nor Jove himself, when he a swan would be For love of Leda, whiter did appear Yet Leda was (they say) as white as he, Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near So purely white they were That even the gentle stream, the which them bare? Seem'd foul to them, and bade his billows spare To wet their silken feathers, lest they might Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair, And mar their beauties bright That shone as Heaven's light Against their bridal day, which was not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. Eftsoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill? Ran all in haste to see that silver brood As they came floating on the crystal flood Whom when they saw, they stood amaz┬d still Their wondering eyes to fill Them seem'd they never saw a sight so fair Of fowls, so lovely, that they sure did deem Them heavenly born, or to be that same pair Which through the sky draw Venus' silver team For sure they did not seem To be begot of any earthly seed, But rather Angels, or of Angels' breed Yet were they bred of summer's heat, they say, In sweetest season, when each flower and weed The earth did fresh array So fresh they seem'd as day, Ev'n as their bridal day, which was not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. Then forth they all out of their baskets drew Great store of flowers, the honour of the field, That to the sense did fragrant odours yield, All which upon those goodly birds they threw And all the waves did strew, That like old Peneus' waters they did seem When down along by pleasant Tempe's shore Scatter'd with flowers, through Thessaly they stream, That they appear, through lilies' plenteous store, Like a bride's chamber-floor. Two of those nymphs meanwhile two garlands bound Of freshest flowers which in that mead they found, The which presenting all in trim array, Their snowy foreheads therewithal they crown'd Whilst one did sing this lay Prepared against that day, Against their bridal day, which was not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. "Ye gentle birds! the world's fair ornament, And heaven's glory, whom this happy hour Doth lead unto your lovers' blissful bower, Joy may you have, and gentle heart's content Of your love's couplement And let fair Venus, that is queen of love, With her heart-quelling son upon you smile, Whose smile, they say, hath virtue to remove All love's dislike, and friendship's faulty guile For ever to assoil. Let endless peace your steadfast hearts accord, And blessed plenty wait upon your board And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound, That fruitful issue may to you afford Which may your foes confound, And make your joys redound Upon your bridal day, which is not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song." So ended she and all the rest around To her redoubled that her undersong, Which said their bridal day should not be long And gentle Echo from the neighbour ground Their accents did resound. So forth those joyous birds did pass along Adown the Lee that to them murmur'd low, As he would speak but that he lack'd a tongue Yet did by signs his glad affection show, Making his stream run slow. And all the fowl which in his flood did dwell 'Gan flock about these twain, that did excel The rest, so far as Cynthia doth shend The lesser stars. So they, enrang┬d well, Did on those two attend, And their best service lend Against their wedding day, which was not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. At length they all to merry London came, To merry London, my most kindly nurse, That to me gave this life's first native source, Though from another place I take my name, An house of ancient fame: There when they came whereas those bricky towers The which on Thames' broad aged back do ride, Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers, There whilome wont the Templar-knights to bide, Till they decay'd through pride Next whereunto there stands a stately place, Where oft I gain┬d gifts and goodly grace Of that great lord, which therein wont to dwell, Whose want too well now feels my friendless case: But ah! here fits not well Old woes, but joys to tell Against the bridal day, which is not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer, Great England's glory and the world's wide wonder, Whose dreadful name late through all Spain did thunder, And Hercules' two pillars standing near Did make to quake and fear: Fair branch of honour, flower of chivalry! That fillest England with thy triumphs' fame Joy have thou of thy noble victory, And endless happiness of thine own name That promiseth the same That through thy prowess and victorious arms Thy country may be freed from foreign harms, And great Elisa's glorious name may ring Through all the world, fill'd with thy wide alarms, Which some brave Muse may sing To ages following: Upon the bridal day, which is not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. From those high towers this noble lord iss┣ing Like radiant Hesper, when his golden hair In th' ocean billows he hath bath┬d fair, Descended to the river's open viewing With a great train ensuing. Above the rest were goodly to be seen Two gentle knights of lovely face and feature, Beseeming well the bower of any queen, With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature, Fit for so goodly stature, That like the twins of Jove they seem'd in sight Which deck the baldric of the heavens bright They two, forth pacing to the river's side, Received those two fair brides, their love's delight Which, at th' appointed tide, Each one did make his bride Against their bridal day, which is not long: Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song. An Elegy SHE fell away in her first ages spring, Whil'st yet her leafe was greene, and fresh her rinde, And whil'st her braunch faire blossomes foorth did bring, She fell away against all course of kinde. For age to dye is right, but youth is wrong She fel away like fruit blowne downe with winde. Weepe, Shepheard! weepe, to make my undersong. Yet fell she not as one enforst to dye, Ne dyde with dread and grudging discontent, But as one toyld with travaile downe doth lye, So lay she downe, as if to sleepe she went, And closde her eyes with carelesse quietnesse The whiles soft death away her spirit hent, And soule assoyld from sinfull fleshlinesse. How happie was I when I saw her leade The Shepheards daughters dauncing in a rownd! How trimly would she trace and softly tread The tender grasse, with rosie garland crownd! And when she list advance her heavenly voyce, Both Nymphes and Muses nigh she made astownd, And flocks and shepheards caus┬d to rejoyce. But now, ye Shepheard lasses! who shall lead Your wandring troupes, or sing your virelayes? Or who shall dight your bowres, sith she is dead That was the Lady of your holy-dayes? Let now your blisse be turn┬d into bale, And into plaints convert your joyous playes, And with the same fill every hill and dale. For I will walke this wandring pilgrimage, Throughout the world from one to other end, And in affliction wast my better age: My bread shall be the anguish of my mind, My drink the teares which fro mine eyed do raine, My bed the ground that hardest I may finde So will I wilfully increase my paine. Ne sleepe (the harbenger of wearie wights) Shall ever lodge upon mine ey-lids more Ne shall with rest refresh my fainting sprights, Nor failing force to former strength restore: But I will wake and sorrow all the night With Philumene, my fortune to deplore With Philumene, the partner of my plight. And ever as I see the starres to fall, And under ground to goe to give them light Which dwell in darknes, I to minde will call How my fair Starre (that shinde on me so bright) Fell sodainly and faded under ground Since whose departure, day is turnd to night, And night without a Venus starre is found. And she, my love that was, my Saint that is, When she beholds from her celestiall throne (In which shee joyeth in eternall blis) My bitter penance, will my case bemone, And pitie me that living thus doo die For heavenly spirits have compassion On mortall men, and rue their miserie. So when I have with sorowe satisfide Th' importune fates, which vengeance on me seeke, And th' heavens with long languor pacifide, She, for pure pitie of my sufferance meeke, Will send for me for which I daylie long: And will till then my painful penance eeke. Weep, Shepheard! weep, to make my undersong! MOST glorious Lord of Lyfe! that on this day Didst make Thy triumph over death and sin And having harrowd hell didst bring away Captivity thence captive us to win: This joyous day deare Lord with joy begin And grant that we for whom thou diddest dye Being with Thy deare blood clene washt from sin May live for ever in felicity! And that Thy love we weighing worthily May likewise love Thee for the same againe And for Thy sake that all lyke deare didst buy With love may one another entertayne! So let us love deare Love lyke as we ought ！Love is the lesson which the Lord us taught. PART I ON either side the river lie Long fields of barley and of rye, That clothe the wold and meet the sky And thro' the field the road runs by To many-tower'd Camelot And up and down the people go, Gazing where the lilies blow Round an island there below, The island of Shalott. Willows whiten, aspens quiver, Little breezes dusk and shiver Thro' the wave that runs for ever By the island in the river Flowing down to Camelot. Four gray walls, and four gray towers, Overlook a space of flowers, And the silent isle imbowers The Lady of Shalott. By the margin, willow-veil'd, Slide the heavy barges trail'd By slow horses and unhail'd The shallop flitteth silken-sail'd Skimming down to Camelot: But who hath seen her wave her hand? Or at the casement seen her stand? Or is she known in all the land, The Lady of Shalott? Only reapers, reaping early In among the bearded barley, Hear a song that echoes cheerly From the river winding clearly, Down to tower'd Camelot: And by the moon the reaper weary, Piling sheaves in uplands airy, Listening, whispers ''Tis the fairy Lady of Shalott.' PART II There she weaves by night and day A magic web with colours gay. She has heard a whisper say, A curse is on her if she stay To look down to Camelot. She knows not what the curse may be, And so she weaveth steadily, And little other care hath she, The Lady of Shalott. And moving thro' a mirror clear That hangs before her all the year, Shadows of the world appear. There she sees the highway near Winding down to Camelot: There the river eddy whirls, And there the surly village-churls, And the red cloaks of market girls, Pass onward from Shalott. Sometimes a troop of damsels glad, An abbot on an ambling pad, Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad, Or long-hair'd page in crimson clad, Goes by to tower'd Camelot And sometimes thro' the mirror blue The knights come riding two and two: She hath no loyal knight and true, The Lady of Shalott. But in her web she still delights To weave the mirror's magic sights, For often thro' the silent nights A funeral, with plumes and lights, And music, went to Camelot: Or when the moon was overhead, Came two young lovers lately wed 'I am half sick of shadows,' said The Lady of Shalott. PART III A bow-shot from her bower-eaves, He rode between the barley-sheaves, The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves, And flamed upon the brazen greaves Of bold Sir Lancelot. A red-cross knight for ever kneel'd To a lady in his shield, That sparkled on the yellow field, Beside remote Shalott. The gemmy bridle glitter'd free, Like to some branch of stars we see Hung in the golden Galaxy. The bridle bells rang merrily As he rode down to Camelot: And from his blazon'd baldric slung A mighty silver bugle hung, And as he rode his armour rung, Beside remote Shalott. All in the blue unclouded weather Thick-jewell'd shone the saddle-leather, The helmet and the helmet-feather Burn'd like one burning flame together, As he rode down to Camelot. As often thro' the purple night, Below the starry clusters bright, Some bearded meteor, trailing light, Moves over still Shalott. His broad clear brow in sunlight glow'd On burnish'd hooves his war-horse trode From underneath his helmet flow'd His coal-black curls as on he rode, As he rode down to Camelot. From the bank and from the river He flash'd into the crystal mirror, 'Tirra lirra,' by the river Sang Sir Lancelot. She left the web, she left the loom, She made three paces thro' the room, She saw the water-lily bloom, She saw the helmet and the plume, She look'd down to Camelot. Out flew the web and floated wide The mirror crack'd from side to side 'The curse is come upon me!' cried The Lady of Shalott. PART IV In the stormy east-wind straining, The pale yellow woods were waning, The broad stream in his banks complaining, Heavily the low sky raining Over tower'd Camelot Down she came and found a boat Beneath a willow left afloat, And round about the prow she wrote The Lady of Shalott. And down the river's dim expanse！ Like some bold seer in a trance, Seeing all his own mischance！ With a glassy countenance Did she look to Camelot. And at the closing of the day She loosed the chain, and down she lay The broad stream bore her far away, The Lady of Shalott. Lying, robed in snowy white That loosely flew to left and right！ The leaves upon her falling light！ Thro' the noises of the night She floated down to Camelot: And as the boat-head wound along The willowy hills and fields among, They heard her singing her last song, The Lady of Shalott. Heard a carol, mournful, holy, Chanted loudly, chanted lowly, Till her blood was frozen slowly, And her eyes were darken'd wholly, Turn'd to tower'd Camelot For ere she reach'd upon the tide The first house by the water-side, Singing in her song she died, The Lady of Shalott. Under tower and balcony, By garden-wall and gallery, A gleaming shape she floated by, Dead-pale between the houses high, Silent into Camelot. Out upon the wharfs they came, Knight and burgher, lord and dame, And round the prow they read her name, The Lady of Shalott. Who is this? and what is here? And in the lighted palace near Died the sound of royal cheer And they cross'd themselves for fear, All the knights at Camelot: But Lancelot mused a little space He said, 'She has a lovely face God in His mercy lend her grace, The Lady of Shalott.' IT is the miller's daughter, And she is grown so dear, so dear, That I would be the jewel That trembles in her ear: For hid in ringlets day and night, I'd touch her neck so warm and white. And I would be the girdle About her dainty dainty waist, And her heart would beat against me, In sorrow and in rest: And I should know if it beat right, I'd clasp it round so close and tight. And I would be the necklace, And all day long to fall and rise Upon her balmy bosom, With her laughter or her sighs: And I would lie so light, so light, I scarce should be unclasp'd at night. THERE is sweet music here that softer falls Than petals from blown roses on the grass, Or night-dews on still waters between walls Of shadowy granite, in a gleaming pass Music that gentlier on the spirit lies, Than tired eyelids upon tired eyes Music that brings sweet sleep down from the blissful skies. Here are cool mosses deep, And thro' the moss the ivies creep, And in the stream the long-leaved flowers weep, And from the craggy ledge the poppy hangs in sleep. Why are we weigh'd upon with heaviness, And utterly consumed with sharp distress, While all things else have rest from weariness? All things have rest: why should we toil alone, We only toil, who are the first of things, And make perpetual moan, Still from one sorrow to another thrown: Nor ever fold our wings, And cease from wanderings, Nor steep our brows in slumber's holy balm Nor harken what the inner spirit sings, 'There is no joy but calm!'！ Why should we only toil, the roof and crown of things? Lo! in the middle of the wood, The folded leaf is woo'd from out the bud With winds upon the branch, and there Grows green and broad, and takes no care, Sun-steep'd at noon, and in the moon Nightly dew-fed and turning yellow Falls, and floats adown the air. Lo! sweeten'd with the summer light, The full-juiced apple, waxing over-mellow, Drops in a silent autumn night. All its allotted length of days, The flower ripens in its place, Ripens and fades, and falls, and hath no toil, Fast-rooted in the fruitful soil. Hateful is the dark-blue sky, Vaulted o'er the dark-blue sea. Death is the end of life ah, why Should life all labour be? Let us alone. Time driveth onward fast, And in a little while our lips are dumb. Let us alone. What is it that will last? All things are taken from us, and become Portions and parcels of the dreadful Past. Let us alone. What pleasure can we have To war with evil? Is there any peace In ever climbing up the climbing wave? All things have rest, and ripen toward the grave In silence ripen, fall and cease: Give us long rest or death, dark death, or dreamful ease. How sweet it were, hearing the downward stream, With half-shut eyes ever to seem Falling asleep in a half-dream! To dream and dream, like yonder amber light, Which will not leave the myrrh-bush on the height To hear each other's whisper'd speech Eating the Lotos day by day, To watch the crisping ripples on the beach, And tender curving lines of creamy spray To lend our hearts and spirits wholly To the influence of mild-minded melancholy To muse and brood and live again in memory, With those old faces of our infancy Heap'd over with a mound of grass, Two handfuls of white dust, shut in an urn of brass! Dear is the memory of our wedded lives, And dear the last embraces of our wives And their warm tears: but all hath suffer'd change For surely now our household hearts are cold: Our sons inherit us: our looks are strange: And we should come like ghosts to trouble joy. Or else the island princes over-bold Have eat our substance, and the minstrel sings Before them of the ten years' war in Troy, And our great deeds, as half-forgotten things. Is there confusion in the little isle? Let what is broken so remain. The Gods are hard to reconcile: 'Tis hard to settle order once again. There is confusion worse than death, Trouble on trouble, pain on pain, Long labour unto ag┬d breath, Sore task to hearts worn out with many wars And eyes grown dim with gazing on the pilot-stars. But, propt on beds of amaranth and moly, How sweet (while warm airs lull us, blowing lowly) With half-dropt eyelids still, Beneath a heaven dark and holy, To watch the long bright river drawing slowly His waters from the purple hill！ To hear the dewy echoes calling From cave to cave thro' the thick-twin┬d vine！ To watch the emerald-colour'd water falling Thro' many a wov'n acanthus-wreath divine! Only to hear and see the far-off sparkling brine, Only to hear were sweet, stretch'd out beneath the pine. The Lotos blooms below the barren peak: The Lotos blows by every winding creek: All day the wind breathes low with mellower tone: Thro' every hollow cave and alley lone Round and round the spicy downs the yellow Lotos-dust is blown. We have had enough of action, and of motion we, Roll'd to starboard, roll'd to larboard, when the surge was seething free, Where the wallowing monster spouted his foam-fountains in the sea. Let us swear an oath, and keep it with an equal mind, In the hollow Lotos-land to live and lie relined On the hills like Gods together, careless of mankind. For they lie beside their nectar, and the bolts are hurl'd Far below them in the valleys, and the clouds are lightly curl'd Round their golden houses, girdled with the gleaming world: Where the smile in secret, looking over wasted lands, Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery sands, Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships, and praying hands. But they smile, they find a music centred in a doleful song Steaming up, a lamentation and an ancient tale of wrong, Like a tale of little meaning tho' the words are strong Chanted from an ill-used race of men that cleave the soil, Sow the seed, and reap the harvest with enduring toil, Storing yearly little dues of wheat, and wine and oil Till they perish and they suffer！some, 'tis whisper'd！down in hell Suffer endless anguish, others in Elysian valleys dwell, Resting weary limbs at last on beds of asphodel. Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore Than labour in the deep mid-ocean, wind and wave and oar O rest ye, brother mariners, we will not wander more. DEEP on the convent-roof the snows Are sparkling to the moon: My breath to heaven like vapour goes: May my soul follow soon! The shadows of the convent-towers Slant down the snowy sward, Still creeping with the creeping hours That lead me to my Lord: Make Thou my spirit pure and clear As are the frosty skies, Or this first snowdrop of the year That in my bosom lies. As these white robes are soil'd and dark, To yonder shining ground As this pale taper's earthly spark, To yonder argent round So shows my soul before the Lamb, My spirit before Thee So in mine earthly house I am, To that I hope to be. Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far, Thro' all yon starlight keen, Draw me, thy bride, a glittering star, In raiment white and clean. He lifts me to the golden doors The flashes come and go All heaven bursts her starry floors, And strows her lights below, And deepens on and up! the gates Roll back, and far within For me the Heavenly Bridegroom waits, To make me pure of sin. The sabbaths of Eternity, One sabbath deep and wide！ A light upon the shining sea！ The Bridegroom with his bride! THE splendour falls on castle walls And snowy summits old in story: The long light shakes across the lakes And the wild cataract leaps in glory. Blow bugle blow set the wild echoes flying Blow bugle answer echoes dying dying dying. O hark O hear! how thin and clear And thinner clearer farther going! O sweet and far from cliff and scar The horns of Elfland faintly blowing! Blow let us hear the purple glens replying: Blow bugle answer echoes dying dying dying. O love they die in yon rich sky They faint on hill or field or river: Our echoes roll from soul to soul And grow for ever and for ever. Blow bugle blow set the wild echoes flying And answer echoes answer dying dying dying. NOW sleeps the crimson petal, now the white Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font: The firefly wakens: waken thou with me. Now droops the milk-white peacock like a ghost, And like a ghost she glimmers on to me. Now lies the Earth all Dana? to the stars, And all thy heart lies open unto me. Now slides the silent meteor on, and leaves A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me. Now folds the lily all her sweetness up, And slips into the bosom of the lake: So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip Into my bosom and be lost in me. COME down, O maid, from yonder mountain height: What pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang), In height and cold, the splendour of the hills? But cease to move so near the Heavens, and cease To glide a sunbeam by the blasted Pine, To sit a star upon the sparkling spire And come, for Love is of the valley, come, For Love is of the valley, come thou down And find him by the happy threshold, he, Or hand in hand with Plenty in the maize, Or red with spirted purple of the vats, Or foxlike in the vine nor cares to walk With Death and Morning on the silver horns, Nor wilt thou snare him in the white ravine, Nor find him dropt upon the firths of ice, That huddling slant in furrow-cloven falls To roll the torrent out of dusky doors: But follow let the torrent dance thee down To find him in the valley let the wild Lean-headed Eagles yelp alone, and leave The monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill Their thousand wreaths of dangling water-smoke, That like a broken purpose waste in air: So waste not thou but come for all the vales Await thee azure pillars of the hearth Arise to thee the children call, and I Thy shepherd pipe, and sweet is every sound, Sweeter thy voice, but every sound is sweet Myriads of rivulets hurrying thro' the lawn, The moan of doves in immemorial elms, And murmuring of innumerable bees. (ARTHUR HENRY HALLAM MDCCCXXXIII) I FAIR ship, that from the Italian shore Sailest the placid ocean-plains With my lost Arthur's loved remains, Spread thy full wings, and waft him o'er. So draw him home to those that mourn In vain a favourable speed Ruffle thy mirror'd mast, and lead Thro' prosperous floods his holy urn. All night no ruder air perplex Thy sliding keel, till Phosphor, bright As our pure love, thro' early light Shall glimmer on the dewy decks. Sphere all your lights around, above Sleep, gentle heavens, before the prow Sleep, gentle winds, as he sleeps now, My friend, the brother of my love My Arthur, whom I shall not see Till all my widow'd race be run Dear as the mother to the son, More than my brothers are to me. II I hear the noise about thy keel I hear the bell struck in the night I see the cabin-window bright I see the sailor at the wheel. Thou bring'st the sailor to his wife, And travell'd men from foreign lands And letters unto trembling hands And, thy dark freight, a vanish'd life. So bring him: we have idle dreams: This look of quiet flatters thus Our home-bred fancies: O to us, The fools of habit, sweeter seems To rest beneath the clover sod, That takes the sunshine and the rains, Or where the kneeling hamlet drains The chalice of the grapes of God Than if with thee the roaring wells Should gulf him fathom-deep in brine And hands so often clasp'd in mine, Should toss with tangle and with shells. III Calm is the morn without a sound, Calm as to suit a calmer grief, And only thro' the faded leaf The chestnut pattering to the ground: Calm and deep peace on this high wold, And on these dews that drench the furze, And all the silvery gossamers That twinkle into green and gold: Calm and still light on yon great plain That sweeps with all its autumn bowers, And crowded farms and lessening towers, To mingle with the bounding main: Calm and deep peace in this wide air, These leaves that redden to the fall And in my heart, if calm at all, If any calm, a calm despair: Calm on the seas, and silver sleep, And waves that sway themselves in rest, And dead calm in that noble breast Which heaves but with the heaving deep. IV To-night the winds begin to rise And roar from yonder dropping day: The last red leaf is whirl'd away, The rooks are blown about the skies The forest crack'd, the waters curl'd, The cattle huddled on the lea And wildly dash'd on tower and tree The sunbeam strikes along the world: And but for fancies, which aver That all thy motions gently pass Athwart a plane of molten glass, I scarce could brook the strain and stir That makes the barren branches loud And but for fear it is not so, The wild unrest that lives in woe Would dote and pore on yonder cloud That rises upward always higher, And onward drags a labouring breast, And topples round the dreary west, A looming bastion fringed with fire. V Thou comest, much wept for: such a breeze Compell'd thy canvas, and my prayer Was as the whisper of an air To breathe thee over lonely seas. For I in spirit saw thee move Thro' circles of the bounding sky, Week after week: the days go by: Come quick, thou bringest all I love. Henceforth, wherever thou mayst roam My blessing, like a line of light, Is on the waters day and night, And like a beacon guards thee home. So may whatever tempest mars Mid-ocean, spare thee, sacred bark And balmy drops in summer dark Slide from the bosom of the stars. So kind an office hath been done, Such precious relics brought by thee The dust of him I shall not see Till all my widow'd race be run. VI Now, sometimes in my sorrow shut, Or breaking into song by fits, Alone, alone, to where he sits, The Shadow cloak'd from head to foot, Who keeps the keys of all the creeds, I wander, often falling lame, And looking back to whence I came, Or on to where the pathway leads And crying, How changed from where it ran Thro' lands where not a leaf was dumb But all the lavish hills would hum The murmur of a happy Pan: When each by turns was guide to each, And Fancy light from Fancy caught, And Thought leapt out to wed with Thought Ere Thought could wed itself with Speech And all we met was fair and good, And all was good that Time could bring, And all the secret of the Spring Moved in the chambers of the blood And many an old philosophy On Argive heights divinely sang, And round us all the thicket rang To many a flute of Arcady. VII How fares it with the happy dead? For here the man is more and more But he forgets the days before God shut the doorways of his head. The days have vanish'd, tone and tint, And yet perhaps the hoarding sense Gives out at times (he knows not whence) A little flash, a mystic hint And in the long harmonious years (If Death so taste Lethean springs) May some dim touch of earthly things Surprise thee ranging with thy peers. If such a dreamy touch should fall, O turn thee round, resolve the doubt My guardian angel will speak out In that high place, and tell thee all. VIII The wish, that of the living whole No life may fail beyond the grave, Derives it not from what we have The likest God within the soul? Are God and Nature then at strife, That Nature lends such evil dreams? So careful of the type she seems, So careless of the single life That I, considering everywhere Her secret meaning in her deeds, And finding that of fifty seeds She often brings but one to bear, I falter where I firmly trod, And falling with my weight of cares Upon the great world's altar-stairs That slope thro' darkness up to God, I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope, And gather dust and chaff, and call To what I feel is Lord of all, And faintly trust the larger hope. IX 'So careful of the type?' but no. From scarp┬d cliff and quarried stone She cries, 'A thousand types are gone: I care for nothing, all shall go. Thou makest thine appeal to me: I bring to life, I bring to death: The spirit does but mean the breath: I know no more.' And he, shall he, Man, her last work, who seem'd so fair, Such splendid purpose in his eyes, Who roll'd the psalm to wintry skies, Who built him fanes of fruitless prayer, Who trusted God was love indeed And love Creation's final law！ Tho' Nature, red in tooth and claw With ravine, shriek'd against his creed！ Who loved, who suffer'd countless ills, Who battled for the True, the Just, Be blown about the desert dust, Or seal'd within the iron hills? No more? A monster then, a dream, A discord. Dragons of the prime, That tare each other in their slime, Were mellow music match'd with him. O life as futile, then, as frail! O for thy voice to soothe and bless! What hope of answer, or redress? Behind the veil, behind the veil. X Unwatch'd, the garden bough shall sway, The tender blossom flutter down Unloved, that beech will gather brown, This maple burn itself away Unloved, the sunflower, shining fair, Ray round with flames her disk of seed, And many a rose-carnation feed With summer spice the humming air Unloved, by many a sandy bar, The brook shall babble down the plain, At noon or when the lesser wain Is twisting round the polar star Uncared for, gird the windy grove, And flood the haunts of hern and crake Or into silver arrows break The sailing moon in creek and cove Till from the garden and the wild A fresh association blow, And year by year the landscape grow Familiar to the stranger's child As year by year the labourer tills His wonted glebe, or lops the glades And year by year our memory fades From all the circle of the hills. XI Now fades the last long streak of snow, Now burgeons every maze of quick About the flowering squares, and thick By ashen roots the violets blow. Now rings the woodland loud and long, The distance takes a lovelier hue, And drown'd in yonder living blue The lark becomes a sightless song. Now dance the lights on lawn and lea, The flocks are whiter down the vale, And milkier every milky sail On winding stream or distant sea Where now the seamew pipes, or dives In yonder greening gleam, and fly The happy birds, that change their sky To build and brood that live their lives From land to land and in my breast Spring wakens too and my regret Becomes an April violet, And buds and blossoms like the rest. XII Love is and was my Lord and King, And in his presence I attend To hear the tidings of my friend, Which every hour his couriers bring. Love is and was my King and Lord, And will be, tho' as yet I keep Within his court on earth, and sleep Encompass'd by his faithful guard, And hear at times a sentinel Who moves about from place to place, And whispers to the worlds of space, In the deep night, that all is well. COME into the garden, Maud, For the black bat, Night, has flown, Come into the garden, Maud, I am here at the gate alone And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad, And the musk of the roses blown. For a breeze of morning moves, And the planet of Love is on high, Beginning to faint in the light that she loves On a bed of daffodil sky, To faint in the light of the sun she loves, To faint in his light, and to die. All night have the roses heard The flute, violin, bassoon All night has the casement jessamine stirr'd To the dancers dancing in tune Till a silence fell with the waking bird, And a hush with the setting moon. I said to the lily, 'There is but one With whom she has heart to be gay. When will the dancers leave her alone? She is weary of dance and play.' Now half to the setting moon are gone, And half to the rising day Low on the sand and loud on the stone The last wheel echoes away. I said to the rose, 'The brief night goes In babble and revel and wine. O young lord-lover, what sighs are those For one that will never be thine? But mine, but mine,' so I sware to the rose, 'For ever and ever, mine.' And the soul of the rose went into my blood, As the music clash'd in the hall And long by the garden lake I stood, For I heard your rivulet fall From the lake to the meadow and on to the wood, Our wood, that is dearer than all From the meadow your walks have left so sweet That whenever a March-wind sighs He sets the jewel-print of your feet In violets blue as your eyes, To the woody hollows in which we meet And the valleys of Paradise. The slender acacia would not shake One long milk-bloom on the tree The white lake-blossom fell into the lake, As the pimpernel dozed on the lea But the rose was awake all night for your sake, Knowing your promise to me The lilies and roses were all awake, They sigh'd for the dawn and thee. Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls, Come hither, the dances are done, In gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls, Queen lily and rose in one Shine out, little head, sunning over with curls. To the flowers, and be their sun. There has fallen a splendid tear From the passion-flower at the gate. She is coming, my dove, my dear She is coming, my life, my fate The red rose cries, 'She is near, she is near' And the white rose weeps, 'She is late' The larkspur listens, 'I hear, I hear' And the lily whispers, 'I wait.' She is coming, my own, my sweet Were it ever so airy a tread, My heart would hear her and beat, Were it earth in an earthy bed My dust would hear her and beat, Had I lain for a century dead Would start and tremble under her feet, And blossom in purple and red. O THAT 'twere possible After long grief and pain To find the arms of my true love Round me once again!... A shadow flits before me Not thou but like to thee: Ah Christ! that it were possible For one short hour to see The souls we loved that they might tell us What and where they be! WITH BLACKEST moss the flower-plots Were thickly crusted, one and all: The rusted nails fell from the knots That held the pear to the gable-wall. The broken sheds look'd sad and strange: Unlifted was the clinking latch Weeded and worn the ancient thatch Upon the lonely moated grange. She only said, "My life is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" Her tears fell with the dews at even Her tears fell ere the dews were dried She could not look on the sweet heaven, Either at morn or eventide. After the flitting of the bats, When thickest dark did trance the sky, She drew her casement-curtain by, And glanced athwart the glooming flats. She only said, "My life is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" Upon the middle of the night, Waking she heard the night-fowl crow: The cock sung out an hour ere light: From the dark fen the oxen's low Came to her: without hope of change, In sleep she seem'd to walk forlorn, Till cold winds woke the gray-eyed morn About the lonely moated grange. She only said, "The day is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" About a stone-cast from the wall A sluice with blacken'd waters slept, And o'er it many, round and small, The cluster'd marish-mosses crept. Hard by a poplar shook alway, All silver-green with gnarled bark: For leagues no other tree did mark The level waste, the rounding gray. She only said, "My life is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" And ever when the moon was low, And the shrill winds were up and away In the white curtain, to and fro, She saw the gusty shadow sway. But when the moon was very low, And wild winds bound within their cell, The shadow of the poplar fell Upon her bed, across her brow. She only said, "The night is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" All day within the dreamy house, The doors upon their hinges creak'd The blue fly sung in the pane the mouse Behind the mouldering wainscot shriek'd, Or from the crevice peer'd about. Old faces glimmer'd thro' the doors, Old footsteps trod the upper floors, Old voices call'd her from without. She only said, "My life is dreary, He cometh not," she said She said, "I am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead!" The sparrow's chirrup on the roof, The slow clock ticking, and the sound Which to the wooing wind aloof The poplar made, did all confound Her sense but most she loath'd the hour When the thick-moted sunbeam lay Athwart the chambers, and the day Was sloping toward his western bower. Then, said she, "I am very dreary, He will not come," she said She wept, "I am aweary, aweary, O God, that I were dead!" With one black shadow at its feet, The house thro' all the level shines, Close-latticed to the brooding heat, And silent in its dusty vines: A faint-blue ridge upon the right, An empty river-bed before, And shallows on a distant shore, In glaring sand and inlets bright. But "Aye Mary," made she moan, And "Aye Mary," night and morn, And "Ah," she sang, "to be all alone, To live forgotten, and love forlorn." She, as her carol sadder grew, From brow and bosom slowly down Thro' rosy taper fingers drew Her streaming curls of deepest brown To left and right, and made appear, Still-lighted in a secret shrine, Her melancholy eyes divine, The home of woe without a tear. And "Aye Mary," was her moan, "Madonna, sad is night and morn" And "Ah," she sang, "to be all alone, To live forgotten, and love forlorn." Till all the crimson changed, and past Into deep orange o'er the sea, Low on her knees herself she cast, Before Our Lady murmur'd she: Complaining, "Mother, give me grace To help me of my weary load." And on the liquid mirror glow'd The clear perfection of her face. "Is this the form," she made her moan, "That won his praises night and morn?" And "Ah," she said, "but I wake alone, I sleep forgotten, I wake forlorn." Nor bird would sing, nor lamb would bleat, Nor any cloud would cross the vault, But day increased from heat to heat, On stony drought and steaming salt Till now at noon she slept again, And seem'd knee-deep in mountain grass, And heard her native breezes pass, And runlets babbling down the glen. She breathed in sleep a lower moan, And murmuring, as at night and morn She thought, "My spirit is here alone, Walks forgotten, and is forlorn." Dreaming, she knew it was a dream: She felt he was and was not there. She woke: the babble of the stream Fell, and, without, the steady glare Shrank one sick willow sere and small. The river-bed was dusty-white And all the furnace of the light Struck up against the blinding wall. She whisper'd, with a stifled moan More inward than at night or morn, "Sweet Mother, let me not here alone Live forgotten and die forlorn." And, rising, from her bosom drew Old letters, breathing of her worth, For "Love", they said, "must needs be true, To what is loveliest upon earth." An image seem'd to pass the door, To look at her with slight, and say, "But now thy beauty flows away, So be alone for evermore." "O cruel heart," she changed her tone, "And cruel love, whose end is scorn, Is this the end to be left alone, To live forgotten, and die forlorn?" But sometimes in the falling day An image seem'd to pass the door, To look into her eyes and say, "But thou shalt be alone no more." And flaming downward over all From heat to heat the day decreased, And slowly rounded to the east The one black shadow from the wall. "The day to night," she made her moan, "The day to night, the night to morn, And day and night I am left alone To live forgotten, and love forlorn." At eve a dry cicala sung, There came a sound as of the sea Backward the lattice-blind she flung, And lean'd upon the balcony. There all in spaces rosy-bright Large Hesper glitter'd on her tears, And deepening thro' the silent spheres Heaven over Heaven rose the night. And weeping then she made her moan, "The night comes on that knows not morn, When I shall cease to be all alone, To live forgotten, and love forlorn." Below the thunders of the upper deep Far, far beneath in the abysmal sea, His ancient, dreamless, uninvaded sleep The Kraken sleepeth: faintest sunlights flee About his shadowy sides: above him swell Huge sponges of millenial growth and height And far away into the sickly light, From many a wondrous grot and secret cell Unnumber'd and enormous polypi Winnow with giant arms the slumbering green. There hath he lain for ages and will lie Battening upon huge seaworms in his sleep, Until the latter fire shall heat the deep Then once by man and angels to be seen, In roaring he shall rise and on the surface die. IT was the time when lilies blow, And clouds are highest up in air, Lord Ronald brought a lily-white doe To give his cousin, Lady Clare. I trow they did not part in scorn- Lovers long-betroth'd were they: They too will wed the morrow morn: God's blessing on the day! 'He does not love me for my birth, Nor for my lands so broad and fair He loves me for my own true worth, And that is well,' said Lady Clare. In there came old Alice the nurse, Said, 'Who was this that went from thee?' 'It was my cousin,' said Lady Clare, 'To-morrow he weds vith me.' 'O God be thank'd!' said Alice the nurse, ' That all comes round so just and fair: Lord Ronald is heir of all your lands, And you are not the Lady Clare.' 'Are ye out of your mind, my nurse, my nurse?' Said Lady Clare, 'that ye speak so wild?' 'As God's above,' said Alice the nurse, ' I speak the truth: you are my child. 'The old Earl's daughter died at my breast I speak the truth, as I live by bread! I buried her like my own sweet child, And put my child in her stead.' 'Falsely, falsely have ye done, O mother,' she said, 'if this be true, To keep the best man under the sun So many years from his due.' 'Nay now, my child,' said Alice the nurse, 'But keep the secret for your life, And all you have will be Lord Ronald's, When you are man and wife.' ' If I'm a beggar born,' she said, 'I will speak out, for I dare not lie. Pull off, pull off, the brooch of gold, And fling the diamond necklace by.' 'Nay now, my child,' said Alice the nurse, 'But keep the secret all ye can.' She said, 'Not so: but I will know If there be any faith in man.' 'Nay now, what faith?' said Alice the nurse, 'The man will cleave unto his right.' 'And he shall have it,' the lady replied, 'Tho' I should die to-night.' 'Yet give one kiss to your mother dear ! Alas, my child, I sinn'd for thee.' 'O mother, mother, mother,' she said, 'So strange it seems to me. 'Yet here's a kiss for my mother dear, My mother dear, if this be so, And lay your hand upon my head, And bless me, mother, ere I go.' She clad herself in a russet gown, She was no longer Lady Clare: She went by dale, and she went by down, With a single rose in her hair. The lily-white doe Lord Ronald had brought Leapt up from where she lay, Dropt her head in the maiden's hand, And follow'd her all the way. Down stept Lord Ronald from his tower: 'O Lady Clare, you shame your worth! Why come you drest like a village maid, That are the flower of the earth?' 'If I come drest like a village maid, I am but as my fortunes are: I am a beggar born,' she said, 'And not the Lady Clare.' 'Play me no tricks,' said Lord Ronald, 'For I am yours in word and in deed. Play me no tricks,' said Lord Ronald, 'Your riddle is hard to read.' O and proudly stood she up! Her heart within her did not fail: She look'd into Lord Ronald's eyes, And told him all her nurse's tale. He laugh'd a laugh of merry scorn: He turn'd and kiss'd her where she stood: 'If you are not the heiress born, And I,' said he, 'the next in blood-- 'If you are not the heiress born, And I,' said he, 'the lawful heir, We two will wed to-morrow morn, And you shall still be Lady Clare.' 